INTRODUCTION

Language is one of the most uniquely human capacities that our species possesses, and one that is involved in all others, including consciousness, sociality and culture. We employ the symbolic system of language to make meaning and communicate with other fellow humans. We mean and communicate about immediate realities as well as about imagined and remembered worlds, about factual events as well as about intentions and desires. Through a repertoire of language choices, we can directly or indirectly make visible (or purposefully hide) our stance, judgement and emotions both towards the messages that we communicate and towards the addressees of those messages. In characteristically human behaviour, we use language not only to communicate to speciﬁc audiences, but sometimes to address ourselves rather than others, as in self-talk, and other times to address collective, unknown audiences, as when we participate in political speeches, religious sermons, internet navigation, commercial advertisements, newspaper columns or literary works.
We take it for granted that all humans have the potential to accomplish all of these amazing feats in whatever language(s) they happen to grow up with. But many people around the globe also do many of the same things in a language other than their own. In fact, whether we grow up with one, two or several languages, in most cases we will learn additional languages later in life. Many people will learn at least a few words and phrases in a foreign language. Many others will be forced by life circumstances to learn enough of the additional language to fend for themselves in selected matters of daily survival, compulsory education or job-related communication. Others still will choose to develop entire communication repertoires and use literary or scientiﬁc discourses comfortably and with authority in their second language or languages. Indeed, many people around the globe may learn, forget and even relearn a number of languages that are not their mother tongue over the course of their late childhood, adolescence and adulthood. The details of people’s L2 learning histories can vary greatly, depending on where their studies, their families, their jobs and careers, and wider economic and political world events, take them. How do humans learn languages after they learn their ﬁrst? This is the fundamental question that we will explore in this book.

1.1	WHAT IS SLA?	
Second language acquisition (SLA, for short) is the scholarly ﬁeld of inquiry that investigates the human capacity to learn languages other than the ﬁrst, during late childhood, adolescence or adulthood, and once the ﬁrst language or languages have been acquired. It studies a wide variety of complex inﬂuences and phenomena that contribute to the puzzling range of possible outcomes when learning an additional language in a variety of contexts. SLA began in the late 1960s as an emerging interdisciplinary enterprise that borrowed equally from the feeder ﬁelds of language teaching, linguistics, child language acquisition and psychology (Huebner, 1998). During the 1980s and 1990s SLA expanded considerably in scope and methodology, to the point that by the end of the twentieth century, after some 40 years of exponential growth, it had ﬁnally reached its coming of age as an autonomous discipline (Larsen-Freeman, 2000). The growth of SLA continues to be prodigious today. This book is about SLA, its ﬁndings and theories, its research paradigms and its questions for the future.
In this ﬁrst chapter I have three goals. First, I situate SLA in the wider landscape of the language sciences and introduce readers to the aims and scope of this ﬁeld. I then present deﬁnitions of the main terms I will use throughout the text. Finally, I explain the rationale for the rest of the book.

1.2	WHENCE LANGUAGE? DESCRIPTION, EVOLUTION AND ACQUISITION   

How can language as a human faculty be explained? This fundamental question guides a number of language ﬁelds that pursue three kinds of understanding about language: descriptive, evolutionary and developmental.
A number of disciplines within the language sciences aim to provide an accurate and complete description of language at all its levels, such as sounds (phonetics and phonology), minimal grammatical signs (morphology), sentences (syntax), meanings (semantics), texts (discourse analysis) and language in use (sociolinguistics, pragmatics). The overarching question guiding these subﬁelds of linguistics is: What is language made of, and how does it work? Human language manifests itself in spoken, signed and written systems across more than 6,500 languages documented to date (they are catalogued in Ethnologue; see Gordon, 2005). Despite this daunting linguistic variety, however, all languages, no matter how different from each other they may seem (Arabic from American Sign Language from Chinese from English from Spanish from Swahili), share fundamental commonalities, a universal core of very abstract properties. Thus, linguistics and its various subﬁelds aim at generating satisfactory descriptions of each manifestation of human language and they also seek to describe the universal common denominators that all human languages share.
A different approach to explaining language as a human faculty is to ask not what or how, but whence and why questions: Whence in the evolution of the human species did language originate and why? This is the line of inquiry pursued in the study of language evolution, which focuses on the phylogenesis or origins of language. A fundamental area of research for cognitive scientists who study language evolution (and a source of disagreement among them) is whether human language evolved out of animal communication in an evolutionary continuum or whether the two are fundamentally different biological capacities (Bickerton, 2007; Tallerman, 2005). It is well known that other animal species are capable of using elaborate systems of communication to go about collective matters of survival, nutrition and reproduction. The cases of species as different as bees, dolphins and prairie dogs are well researched. However, none of these species has created a symbolic system of communication that even minimally approaches the complexity and versatility of human language. Chimpanzees, however, possess a genetic structure that overlaps 99 per cent with that of Homo Sapiens. Although they do not have a larynx that is ﬁt for human language or hands that could be physically modulated for signing, some of these animals have been taught how to communicate with humans through a rudimentary gesture-based language and through computer keyboards. Bonobos, if reared by humans, as was the case of bonobo celebrity Kanzi, can achieve the comprehension levels of a two-and-a-half- year-old human and develop human-like lexical knowledge (Lyn and Savage- Rumbaugh, 2000). The conclusion that apes can develop true syntactic knowledge remains considerably more controversial, however. As you can guess, language evolution is a fascinating area that has the potential to illuminate the most fundamental questions about language.
For a full understanding of the human language faculty, we also need to engage in a third line of inquiry, namely the study of the ontogenesis of language: How does the human capacity to make meaning through language emerge and deploy in each individual of our species? This is the realm of three ﬁelds that focus on language acquisition of different kinds.

1.3	FIRST LANGUAGE ACQUISITION, BILINGUALISM AND SLA	

In some parts of our world, most children grow up speaking one language only. It should be underscored that this case is truly the minority in the large picture of humanity, although it is the norm in many Western middle-class contexts. Perhaps because many researchers also come from these same contexts, this is the type of language acquisition that has been studied the best (for a good review, see Karmiloff-Smith and Karmiloff-Smith, 2001). The ﬁeld that investigates these cases of monolingual language acquisition is known by the generic name of child language acquisition or ﬁrst language acquisition. A robust empirical research base tells us that, for children who grow up monolingually, the bulk of language is acquired between 18 months and three to four years of age. Child language acquisition happens in a predictable pattern, broadly speaking. First, between the womb and the few ﬁrst months of life, infants attune themselves to the prosodic and phonological makeup of the language to which they are exposed and they also learn the dynamics of turn taking. During their ﬁrst year of life they learn to handle one-word utterances. During the second year, two-word utterances and exponential vocabulary growth occur. The third year of life is characterized by syntactic and morphological deployment. Some more pragmatically or syntactically subtle phenomena are learned by ﬁve or six years of age. After that point, many more aspects of mature language use are tackled when children are taught how to read and write in school. And as children grow older and their life circumstances diversify, different adolescents and adults will embark on very different kinds of literacy practice and use language for widely differing needs, to the point that neat landmarks of acquisition cannot be demarcated any more. Instead, variability and choice are the most interesting and challenging linguistic phenomena to be explained at those later ages. But the process of acquiring language is essentially completed by all healthy children by age four of life, in terms of most abstract syntax, and by age ﬁve or six for most other ‘basics’ of language.
In many parts of the globe, most children grow up speaking two or more languages simultaneously. These cases are in fact the majority in our species. We use the term ‘bilingual acquisition’ or ‘multilingual acquisition’ to refer to the process of learning two or more languages relatively simultaneously during early childhood – that is, before the age of four. The ﬁeld that studies these developmental phenomena is bilingualism (or multilingualism, if several rather than two languages are learned during childhood). Two key questions of interest are how the two (or more) languages are represented in the brain and how bilingual speakers switch and alternate between their two (or more) languages, depending on a range of communicative needs and desires. The study of dual ﬁrst language acquisition is only one area of this wide-encompassing ﬁeld, which also includes the study of adult and child bilingual processing and use from psycholinguistic, sociolinguistic and educational perspectives (good introductions to bilingualism are Romaine, 1995; Wei, 2000).
The third ﬁeld devoted to the study of the acquisition and development of the language faculty is second language acquisition, the subject of this book. SLA as a ﬁeld investigates the human capacity to learn languages once the ﬁrst language – in the case of monolingual children – or the ﬁrst languages – in the case of bilingual or multilingual children – have been learned and are established. Naturally, this happens later in life, whether in late childhood, adolescence or adulthood. Sometimes, however, the individuals learning an additional language are still young children when they start acquiring the L2, maybe as young as three or four years old (remember by this early age most of the essential pieces of their mother tongue may be all in place). Thus, bilingualism and SLA can overlap in the early years, making it at times difﬁcult to draw the boundaries between the two ﬁelds. Nevertheless, they are clearly two distinct disciplines with their own journals, conferences and afﬁliations in academia. There are also some key differences between the two ﬁelds. SLA often favours the study of late-starting acquirers, whereas bilingualism favours the study of people who had a very early start with their languages. Additionally, one can say that bilingualism researchers tend to focus on the products of bilingualism as deployed in already mature bilingual capabilities of children or adults, whereas SLA researchers tend to focus on the pathways towards becoming competent in more languages than one. This in turn means that in SLA the emphasis often is on the incipient stages rather than on ultimate, mature competence. A third difference is that bilingual research typically maintains a focus on all the languages of an individual, whereas SLA traditionally orients strongly towards the second language, to the point that the ﬁrst language may be abstracted out of the research picture. In this sense, SLA may be construed as the pure opposite of monolingual (ﬁrst) child language acquisition. Indeed, in both ﬁelds monolingual competence is often taken as the default benchmark of language development. We will return to this issue in the next section.

1.4	MAIN CONCEPTS AND TERMS	

In this book, I will use the acronym SLA to refer to the ﬁeld and discipline and I will reserve the term L2 acquisition to mean the process of learning additional languages, that is, the object of disciplinary inquiry itself. This terminological distinction is not always kept by all SLA researchers, but it has the advantage of giving us added accuracy of expression. By the same token, acquisition and learning will be used interchangeably as synonyms in this book. This is because, as you will see in Chapter 6 (section 6.14), although in the early 1980s there was an attempt at distinguishing between the two terms, in contemporary SLA terminology no such distinction is typically upheld.
The various terms used in SLA discourse to refer to the so-called ‘mother tongue’ and to the ‘additional’ language being learned or acquired need some clariﬁcation. As a useful shorthand, SLA researchers use the terms mother tongue, ﬁrst language or L1 generically to refer to the language (in the case of monolingual acquisition) or languages (in the case of bilingual or multilingual acquisition) that a child learns from parents, siblings and caretakers during the critical years of development, from the womb up to about four years of age. Conversely, the terms additional language, second language and L2 are used in SLA to refer to any language learned after the L1 (or L1s). Of course, things are a lot more complicated in real life. For one, in the case of very young children who are exposed to several languages, it may be impossible to determine whether the two or more languages in question are being learned simultaneously (that is, bilingually or multilingually) or sequentially (that is, as an L2). In addition, the term ‘L2’ or ‘second/additional language’ may mean the third, fourth, tenth and so on language learned later in life. Thus, these labels should be taken to reﬂect more of an analytical abstraction made within a disciplinary tradition and less of a black-and-white reality.
There is some danger in using these dichotomous labels and, as you embark on reading this book about SLA, I would like you to be aware of it. When we oppose L1 acquisition to L2 acquisition, a subtle but dangerous monolingual bias seeps into our imagination. Namely, with the L1–L2 dichotomy as a foundation, the phenomenon under investigation can be easily construed as efforts by monolingual adults to add on a monolingual-like command of an additional language. This bias has been the reason for criticism and self-examination among SLA researchers in the last decade or so, starting with Vivian Cook, who was one of the earliest voices in the ﬁeld to raise these concerns (see Cook, 1991, 2008). This bias is in part reminiscent of the same monolingual orientation in ﬁrst language acquisition research, a strong inﬂuence on SLA during its formative years as a ﬁeld. It is slowly receding, as new research emerges in SLA that is strongly inﬂuenced by studies in bilingualism and by research that addresses social dimensions of L2 learning. Throughout this book, I will do my best not to perpetuate a monolingual bias in my portrayals of SLA ﬁndings and theories. I will also refer to the people who are investigated by SLA researchers as L2 learners, but will alternate that traditional term with several other terms: L2 users, L2 speakers, L2 writers and, when I explain empirical studies, L2 participants. And I will usually use the feminine pronoun she to refer generically to them.
SLA as a ﬁeld is interested in understanding the acquisition of second languages in both naturalistic and instructed contexts. Naturalistic learners learn the L2 through informal opportunities in multicultural neighbourhoods, schools and workplaces, without ever receiving any organized instruction on the workings of the language they are learning. Instructed learners learn additional languages through formal study in school or university, through private lessons and so on. In our globalized world, multifarious opportunities for L2 acquisition arise from travel, employment, migration, war, marriage and other such happy as well as unhappy (and elective as well as circumstantial) life events. Most people, therefore, learn additional languages from a mixture of both naturalistic and instructed experiences.
Many language teachers make a sharp distinction between foreign and second language teaching and are mystiﬁed when they realize the same distinction is often obliterated in SLA studies, as if learning contexts were of little consequence. Yet, it is important to realize that in SLA the term ‘second’ (or ‘L2’) is often used to mean ‘either a second or a foreign language’ and often ‘both’. This is because, for certain research questions and research programmes, it may be useful to temporarily suspend the contextual distinction, for the sake of the analysis at hand. For other research questions and research programmes in SLA, however, distinguishing among speciﬁc contexts for L2 learning is in fact important. In such cases, SLA researchers make three (rather than only two) key contextual distinctions: foreign, second and heritage language learning contexts. The issue of contexts for L2 learning, however, is more complex than it appears at ﬁrst blush, and even this three-way characterization of language learning contexts is often not enough. Throughout the book I will make every effort to contextualize SLA ﬁndings and theories, evaluating what we know about L2 acquisition vis-à-vis speciﬁc contexts and learner populations.
One way to investigate humans’ capacities for learning second languages is to inspect the oral and written records learners produce when people use the new language. Hence, a long tradition within SLA research has been the study of what we call interlanguage, or learners’ mental grammar, and the special variety of language that it generates when they speak or sign, interact, write, negotiate and express themselves in the L2, based on the mental representations they forge of the new grammar. Throughout the book, and particularly in Chapter 6, I will discuss representative interlanguage ﬁndings that help us understand the nature of what is acquired. As you read each chapter, you will ﬁnd that many of the illustrations are in English as an L2. This is because SLA researchers have often focused their research efforts on English. This excessively narrow focus on English should be acknowledged as a limitation, since SLA is about any language that is acquired other than the ﬁrst, not just about acquiring L2 English. Nevertheless, important SLA ﬁndings have been generated in L2s as varied as Arabic, Chinese, Dutch, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Spanish and Swedish. Whenever possible, and in order to strike some balance across L2s, I have chosen a non-English illustration over an English one.
Many other specialized terms have been coined by SLA researchers, but the few presented here will sufﬁce for now. As we delve into the various topics covered in this book, I will highlight new important terms by emboldening them when they are ﬁrst introduced in the text.

1.5	INTERDISCIPLINARITY IN SLA	

SLA has always been a porous, interdisciplinary ﬁeld. For some, it is most intimately connected to theoretical linguistics and ﬁrst language acquisition (White, 2003), and for others to cognitive psychology (Doughty and Long, 2003). Other academic and professional communities view SLA rather differently and associate it most directly with the teaching of languages (Kramsch, 2000). These four ﬁelds (language teaching, linguistics, child language acquisition, psychology) were the ones that originally converged into key initial developments that gave rise to the ﬁeld. As we will see throughout this book, SLA has maintained close theoretical and methodological ties with all four. In addition, it has developed more recent ties with other disciplines, notably bilingualism, psycholinguistics, education, anthropology and sociology.
In general, SLA is seen as a subﬁeld or branch of applied linguistics, a mega-ﬁeld that concerns itself with problems that have their roots in the intersections between language and society, education and cognition (see good reviews of applied linguistics in Davies and Elder, 2004; Schmitt, 2002). Currently SLA enjoys the scholarly outlets typical of all autonomous academic disciplines, including refereed journals, book series in international publishers, specialized conferences, related professional and scientiﬁc associations, and university-based doctoral programmes. This high degree of specialization and autonomy notwithstanding, the ﬁeld remains as strongly interdisciplinary now as it was in its origins.

Many of the questions that SLA researchers investigate are highly relevant in the real world. A few examples here can serve as illustrations of the potential impact that SLA scholarship can have on real-world problems:

•	Parents who regard elective bilingualism as a social value wonder what the optimal age might be for their children to begin learning a foreign language.

This question is related to the age of onset of acquisition, or how early or late in life one should start to learn an additional language after the mother tongue.
•	Policy makers and educators in different countries debate appropriate policies for minority children who speak other languages at home and need to be schooled in the societal language. They also wonder how long it should take them to learn the majority language. This speaks to many questions related to rate of acquisition, or how fast progress can be made in various areas of the L2, and how long is long enough to learn an L2. 
•	Sympathizers of anti-immigrant movements in various countries lament that newcomers to their societies allegedly refuse to learn the language of the majority and persist in settling for rudimentary survival language skills only, even after decades of living in their new country. These are prejudices that may be better countered if we knew more about ultimate attainment or the absolute potential for complete acquisition of the L2 for different people under various learning circumstances that entail diverse needs and goals.
•	Language teachers across institutions all over the world hotly debate whether students in their classrooms need to be directly taught grammar and vocabulary in order to get the basic building blocks of a language ﬁrst, or whether it is better to somehow approximate in their classroom the richness of natural language meaning-making processes. Which of the two broad approaches, or variations thereof, would better prepare lan- guage students for what they will encounter once they are to use the L2 for their own purposes beyond the classroom? This is the question of effective instruction, which plays out across many educational contexts in the form of tensions between formal and experiential approaches to learning. Whether in second, foreign or heritage language teaching, the battles have been for and against traditional grammar teaching and alter- native meaning-oriented proposals, including communicative language teaching, task-based curricula, content-based instruction and focus on form instruction.

As you see, SLA researchers have many opportunities to generate knowledge about L2 acquisition that illuminates these public questions and makes the lives of people who learn and use second languages a little bit better. Therein lies the challenge of contemporary SLA as a discipline: on the one hand, to advance our understanding of theoretical conundrums about the human language faculty and of L2 acquisition phenomena in need of description and explanation; and, on the other, to connect such understandings to the real-world problems that arise for people who, by choice or by circumstance, set out to learn a language other than their mother tongue.
 