CROSSLINGUISTIC INFLUENCES

All L2 acquirers, by deﬁnition, possess complete knowledge of an L1, and often knowledge of other languages, when they begin learning the additional one. Many of them, indeed, will begin acquiring their L2 after many years of being able users of another language. Thus, previous language knowledge is an important source of inﬂuence on L2 acquisition, and this holds universally true of all L2 learners. This chapter offers a synthesis of what we currently know about the following question: If knowledge and capabilities for competent language use are already available to L2 learners through the mother tongue and other languages they may know, how do they affect the development of the new language?
Research on this topic is often known by the rubrics of transfer or crosslinguistic inﬂuence. You may have also heard of ‘interference’, but this older term has been displaced by the former two in contemporary SLA discourse. This is to pre-empt the unwanted implication that knowledge of the ﬁrst language hinders L2 development. Much to the contrary, as we will see in this chapter, crosslinguistic inﬂuences can have positive as well as negative consequences for L2 learning. In addition, knowledge of the L1 impacts on L2 acquisition subtly and selectively, sometimes resulting in strikingly different negative and positive consequences for different learner L1 backgrounds, at different stages of development or proﬁciency and for different areas of the L2.

3.1	ON L1–L2 DIFFERENCES AND SIMILARITIES	

During the 1950s and early 1960s, it was initially hypothesized that differences between the L1 and the L2 were responsible for the L2 difﬁculties experienced by speciﬁc learner groups who shared a same L1. This assumption inspired a wave of research comparing similarities and differences between given language pairs, in what soon was known as the school of Contrastive Analysis (e.g. Stockwell et al., 1965). It was believed that systematic L1–L2 comparisons would eventually allow researchers and teachers to predict when negative transfer will occur and what errors will be produced by particular L1 background groups of L2 learners. During the 1960s and 1970s researchers in the emerging new ﬁeld of SLA turned to analyses of actual learner language and began conducting studies using the new methodology of Error Analysis and later Performance Analysis (see Long and Sato, 1984). It soon became clear that neither the linguistic knowledge nor the linguistic behaviour of L2 learners was slavishly determined by externally catalogued L1–L2 differences.
For one, it soon became apparent that sometimes certain L1–L2 similarities do not seem to help. Let us look at the area of negation to illustrate this point (see also Chapter 6, section 6.7). Negation is achieved pre-verbally in languages such as French (ne + verb), Portuguese (não + verb), or Spanish (no + verb). By contrast, negation is done post-verbally in English, where we add the word not at the end of verbs like is/are or can/should or at the end of the auxiliary do/does/did for all other verbs. The same is true of other languages, such as German (verb + nicht), Norwegian (verb + ikke), and Swedish (verb + inte). Swedish SLA researcher Kenneth Hyltenstam (1977) investigated how 160 beginning learners of L2 Swedish handled negation after ﬁve weeks of study and again after eight weeks, when they had been in Sweden for little more than four months. He found that the general patterns of negation were the same for most of the 160 learners regardless of L1 background, which he took to mean that ‘we are able to study one large interlanguage continuum instead of unrelated [L1–L2 pair] continua’ (p. 401). He also reported that of six L1 Turkish learners in the sample, three seemed to beneﬁt from the similarity between Turkish and Swedish (both are post-verbal negation languages), but the other three learners showed an initial preference for pre-verbal negation. It was only by week 8 that these three learners began to approximate the Swedish target in their negation choices. Why would these learners initially have trouble with something in the L2 that was done similarly in their L1, if it were true that the L2 is learned by simple reliance on the L1?
Conversely, it was also found that certain differences may result in no attested learning difﬁculty whatsoever and furthermore that learning difﬁculties do not possess a symmetrical or bidirectional quality. A good illustration here is the case of placement of pronouns in English and French, brieﬂy discussed by Canadabased researcher Helmut Zobl (1980). English has post-verbal pronoun placement (I see them), whereas French has pre-verbal pronoun placement (Je les vois). This difference does not cause trouble for learners of English from an L1 French background, who seldom produce a logically possible transfer error like I them see. Why do L1 French speakers ﬁnd no problem with this difference when they learn English? By contrast, for L1 English learners of French, the learning of what is essentially the same difference but in the opposite direction poses much more difﬁculty, and the error Je vois les is indeed attested. How can we explain that what is difﬁcult to learn when moving from Lx to Ly is not necessarily difﬁcult when moving from Ly to Lx, if it were true that it is mere L1–L2 differences that cause learning difﬁculty?

3.2	INTERLINGUAL  IDENTIFICATIONS	

Accumulated empirical evidence of this kind led the ﬁrst generation of SLA researchers to conclude that not only differences, but even more often misleading similarities between the L1 and the L2 are at the root of attested learning difﬁculties. German SLA researcher Henning Wode (1976) called this principle the Crucial Similarity Measure. In the United States, Roger Andersen (1983) added the principle of Transfer to Somewhere, suggesting that not only the L1, but also the L2 must have some feature that invites the (mis)perception of a similarity. This is exactly what Klee and Ocampo (1995) discovered in an interesting study of L1 Quechua speakers of L2 Spanish in Peru. A site of difference between these two languages, among many, is evidentiality, that is, the degree of certainty with which a statement is believed or presented to be true. Spanish, just as English, encodes evidentiality lexically, through adverbs such as supuestamente, evidentemente, al parecer (allegedly, evidently, apparently), but Quechua encodes it in the morphology of the verb (for those of you who know German, this would be similar to the use of the Konjunktiv I as in er sei nach Hause gegangen, ‘supposedly, he has gone home’). Klee and Ocampo discovered that many of their participants used the past perfect tense of Spanish verbs, among other devices, to mark the fact that the event has not been witnessed directly, thus signalling evidentiality rather than tense. They concluded that these bilingual Quechua–Spanish speakers had ‘found a way of expressing an obligatory category of Quechua with Spanish forms’ (p. 68). That is, they simply found in the verbal morphology of Spanish present and past tense a good formal recourse to encode evidentiality at the grammatical level, in a fashion congruent with their L1.
The ﬁndings contributed during the 1970s and 1980s also led to a second, even more general insight about crosslinguistic inﬂuence: in order to understand L1 transfer, one needs to go beyond L1–L2 formal correspondences. That is, in the end, a better understanding of the forces that shape crosslinguistic inﬂuence rests not with external language comparisons, but with learners’ psychological perceptions of those L1–L2 similarities or differences. For transfer to occur learners have to make an interlingual identiﬁcation, deﬁned by Terence Odlin as ‘the judgment that something in the native language and something in the target language are similar’ (2003, p. 454). The judgement can be, but need not be, made as a conscious, strategic choice, for example, when there is a gap in L2 knowledge, and the best available solution is to rely on L1 knowledge. Singleton (1987) provides a striking illustration of such cases. He studied the transfer errors committed by Philip, an L1 English professional writer who had picked up French during three short visits to France (he already spoke Spanish ﬂuently and he had studied Irish and Latin in school). In three half-hour interviews in French, 154 transfer errors were identiﬁed. About a third of them were accompanied by a hesitation, an apology, interrogative intonation, laughter or some other overt indication that Philip might have been conscious of the less than perfect transfer solution. When reviewing the interviews and commenting on a speciﬁc French choice retrospectively, Philip said: ‘I knew that it probably wasn’t right, but it was the nearest I could get to something that might be right’ (p. 335).
Interlingual identiﬁcations, however, do not always involve a conscious judgement, as transfer will often occur at the subconscious level as well. Most importantly, as you will see in this chapter, interlingual identiﬁcations are inﬂuenced by at least three factors: (a) the nature of the speciﬁc L2 phenomenon and the universal forces that shape its natural development; (b) learners’ perceived distance between the L1 and the L2 and their intuitions of what is transferable or not; and (c) their relative proﬁciency level.

3.3	BESIDES THE L1	

By turning to analyses of actual learner language rather than comparing external L1–L2 differences, early SLA research also uncovered some fundamental similarities between the emerging language of children acquiring their L1 and young and old learners acquiring their L2. For example, as we will see in Chapter 6, the past tense form runned (rendered as ran in adult mature English language) or the utterance the car was crashed (when mature language speakers of English would say the car crashed) are used at certain stages by children who are learning English as their mother tongue. Exactly these same forms appear in the speech and writing of adults from a wide range of ﬁrst language backgrounds who are learning English as their foreign or second language. These certainly are not forms that can be picked up from, say, caretakers and older siblings, or from co-workers and textbooks. Neither are they forms that could be traced back to the mother tongue, when one considers that children learning their ﬁrst and only language have no preexisting language they could rely on, and that adults regardless of ﬁrst language background produce them too.
Rather, SLA researchers soon concluded these forms must be considered interim systematic solutions that both children and adults independently invent, as it were, when they are trying to ﬁgure out the workings of a new language system. Furthermore, they concluded that there are developmental solutions for a given area of the grammar that L1 and L2 learners must naturally and universally traverse on their path to ﬁnal competence in that area. Although the details for how L1 and L2 learners do this may differ, in the most general sense the developmental constraints are undeniable in both L1 and L2 acquisition. In the end, therefore, the shift away from the cataloguing of external L1–L2 differences and towards analysing actual learner language contributed to the emergence of the notion of interlanguage (Selinker, 1972) and enabled the documentation of natural sequences, orders of acquisition and other rule-governed patterns of development across areas of the L2, a number of which we will examine in Chapter 6. But if there is so much evidence of systematicity and rule-governed interlanguage processes across all L1 backgrounds, then a new question arises: What is the role played by the ﬁrst language in L2 development, vis-à-vis the role of other universal developmental forces?

3.4	FIRST LANGUAGE  INFLUENCES  VIS-À-VIS DEVELOPMENT	

There is robust evidence that L1 transfer cannot radically alter the route of L2 acquisition but it can impact the rate of learners’ progress along their natural developmental paths. This possibility was ﬁrst formulated by Zobl (1982). He proposed that L1–L2 differences account for the pace or rate at which certain morphosyntactic structures will be learned by different L1 groups. All L1 groups will traverse the same series of approximations to the target L2 system, and will be challenged, broadly speaking, by the same aspects of the L2. However, certain L1 groups may stay longer in a given stage, add some extra sub-stage, or ﬁnd it more difﬁcult than other L1 groups to learn some aspect of the L2 system in question. Let us examine here three well-known examples.
The development of negation in English is a well-understood area, already introduced in section 3.1. As we will see in more detail in Chapter 6, section 6.7, it has been ﬁrmly established that at very early stages of development L2 English learners, regardless of L1 background, use pre-verbal negation (No/Not + Verb). In addition to the Turkish–Swedish cases uncovered by Hyltenstam (1977), robust additional evidence exists across L2s. For example, pre-verbal negation was amply attested by Cancino et al. (1978) with L1 Spanish learners whose L1 only allows pre-verbal negation, but also by Ravem (1968) with L1 Norwegian children who initially produced utterances such as I not like that, even though their L1, just like English, only allows post-verbal negation. The effects of the L1 become visible only when one considers rate of development. Speakers of languages where pre-verbal negation is the grammatical norm (e.g. Italian, Greek, Russian and Spanish) will remain in the ﬁrst preverbal negation stage in English much longer than, for example, L1 Norwegian or L1 Japanese speakers, whose L1s, just like the L2 in this case, require post-verbal negation (Zobl, 1982). In other words, when the rules for negation in the L1 are incongruent with the L2 rules, L2 development in this given area is slowed down.
English question formation is another area for which a developmental path has been well mapped in SLA research (see Chapter 6, section 6.12). A research team led at the time by Manfred Pienemann in Australia (Pienemann et al., 1988) found that learners start off by marking their intended questions with a questioning rising intonation. They are able to do this ﬁrst on fragments (stage 1: a hat?) and later on statements (stage 2: you are tired?). Still later, learners begin using a fronting strategy, that is, they build questions by placing question markers (e.g. what, do, is) in front of statements (stage 3: what you want? do your daughter is here? is your daughter work there?). Inversion does not occur until those three stages are acquired. Once inversion emerges at stage 4, it ﬁrst appears simultaneously in whquestions containing the copula is/are (where is dog?) and in yes/no questions containing the auxiliary is/are (are you listening me?). The two last, most advanced stages are inversion in wh-questions across all possible contexts at stage 5 and target-like question formation with special cases at stage 6, such as tags (you are surprised, aren’t you?), negation within questions (don’t you see?) and embedded questions (I wonder why they left). (You will ﬁnd a more formal summary of these stages in Table 6.9.) Many years later, Canadian researchers Nina Spada and Patsy Lightbown (1999) found that L1 inﬂuence can lead to the addition of an unexpected sub-stage in this well-established developmental sequence. Their participants were 144 L1 French sixth-graders learning English, and the unexpected L1 inﬂuence arose in relation to the learning of inversion at stages 4 and 5. For example:
 

(1)	a.	Where can I buy a bicycle?
b.	*Why ﬁsh can live in water?

Both (1a) and (1b) constitute examples of wh-questions that require inversion in English, and therefore (1b) is ungrammatical, as indicated by the asterisk. After eight hours of being exposed to a regime of English questions that were ﬂooded into the instructional materials at school, many of the students began to accept (1a). This was a good sign, in that it indicated English inversion in questions was being learned. However, in apparent contradiction, the same students often accepted ungrammatical sentences like that in (1b). Upon closer inspection of the data, Spada and Lightbown concluded these Francophone learners of English were probably at a stage of development in which their internal grammar sanctioned inversion with pronouns (as in 1a) as grammatical but inversion with nouns (as expected in the native-like English rendition of 1b) as ungrammatical. This is exactly the pattern their L1 French follows. That is, an L1-induced interlanguage rule had emerged, and one that was delaying many of these learners in their path towards adopting the full target-like rule of inversion in English questions.
A third, well-studied area is the English article system, or the choice of whether ‘a’, ‘the’ or zero article is needed in front of nouns (for example, do we say ‘I like Ø French fries’, ‘I like the French fries’ or ‘I like a French fry’?). This topic was investigated in depth by Thom Huebner (1983; see also Chapter 6, section 6.6) and Peter Master (1987), in dissertations at the University of Hawai‘i and the University of California Los Angeles, respectively. English articles are notoriously difﬁcult to learn for all L1 groups alike. However, the nature and magnitude of difﬁculties that learners face depends on their L1. For L2 English learners whose native languages do not have articles at all, there is a pronounced initial disadvantage in rate of acquisition, as Master (1997) details. For example, an early stage of article development in L2 English is characterized by the alternation of one or this with the to mark nouns that refer to entities already known to the hearer. For learners whose L1s have articles, like Spanish, the ﬁrst stage of article development where one or this alternate with the is brief, and the former two non-target-like forms are quickly abandoned in favour of the. When L1–L2 similarities are present, a fast start is to be expected. For example, Jarvis (2002) found that Swedes with only two years of English instruction showed 86 per cent accuracy in their use of the English indeﬁnite article and 98 per cent accuracy in their use of the English deﬁnite article. This can be in part explained by the similarities that English and Swedish exhibit in their article systems. Nevertheless, complete mastery of all functional subtleties of the English articles is difﬁcult, even for such groups. Thus, English learners from a Spanish L1 background tend to overgeneralize the deﬁnite article the to certain generic contexts (I like the French fries) and may continue to do so for some time, even into upper-intermediate levels of L2 proﬁciency. This choice is induced by the semantic makeup underlying their L1 article system, which marks generic meanings with deﬁniteness, where English selects zero article (e.g. me gustan las patatas fritas but I like Ø French fries). Of course, this particular overgeneralization error is less persistent and less frequent, if at all attested, among learners whose L1s do not have articles.

3.5	MARKEDNESS AND L1 TRANSFER	

Markedness is another important source of universal inﬂuence when learning human languages that is known to interact with L1 inﬂuences. The term has been used by linguists in a number of different ways (Batistella, 1996). In SLA, it has been used to denote a closed set of possibilities within a linguistic system, where the given possibilities rank from simplest and most frequent across languages of the world, or unmarked, to most complex and most rare, or marked. In addition, a special characteristic of many but not all markedness sets is that each marked member presupposes the existence of the less marked members, and never the other way around (in other words, the markedness relationship is implicational and unidirectional).
Linguists have found markedness hierarchies across the world’s languages in a number of key areas of morphology, phonology and syntax. A good example is relative clauses, which we will examine in Chapter 6, section 6.11. Another good case concerns the distinction between voiced and voiceless ﬁnal stops. If you touch your Adam’s apple while pressing and releasing your lips to pronounce a clean /b/, you will feel a vibration through your ﬁngertip, because /b/ is a voiced consonant. By contrast, if you now do the same while trying to pronounce a clean /p/, you should feel no vibration at all, because /p/ is a voiceless consonant. Voicing is the main feature distinguishing the two sounds, otherwise both /b/ and /p/ are pronounced using the same articulation features of place (both lips) and manner (a sudden obstruction of air followed by a release accompanied by aspiration). Voiced stops (as in the sounds /b/, /d/ and /g/ in ‘tab’, ‘seed’ and ‘bag’) are more marked than voiceless (as in the sounds /p/, /t/ and /k/ in ‘tap’, ‘seat’ and ‘back’). The evidence comes from multiple sources. All languages of the world have some voiceless stops, but only some have voiceless and voiced ones, and no language exists that has only voiced stops without also having voiceless ones. Children learning an L1 that has both voiceless and voiced stops will acquire the former before the latter. There is also a natural phonetic process operating in human languages called devoicing, by which voiced stops can be pronounced as voiceless in certain positions, so that a marked feature (voiced) becomes neutralized and the unmarked one (voiceless) is used instead.
In L2 acquisition, the markedness principle is particularly successful in explaining well attested directionality effects in the transfer of L1 features. Building on the case of voiced and voiceless stops, both English and German have the same set of voiced and voiceless consonants. However, in English both kinds of consonants can appear in word-ﬁnal position, whereas in German voiced stops do not occur in this position, because the natural process of devoicing applies and all voiced consonants in ﬁnal position are pronounced as voiceless. Thus, for example, the ‘g’ in Tag (‘day’) is actually pronounced as a ‘k’ in German. In the early stages of development, L1 German learners of English have some difﬁculty with English words like ‘wave’ and ‘tab’ that end in voiced consonants. They will often devoice the ﬁnal consonant and pronounce these two words as wafe and tap, in what is a direct transfer of the devoicing rule from their L1. No such difﬁculty has ever been observed in L1 English learners of L2 German (Eckman, 2004, p. 531), who will quickly learn they need to pronounce Tag with a ﬁnal /k/ if they want to sound ‘more German’. This is because their L1 English is more marked and they are learning an unmarked situation in their L2 German. By comparison, L1 German learners of L2 English ﬁnd themselves in a situation where they have to learn the more marked case coming from a less marked rule in their L1.
For L2 development, the general implication is that marked forms tend to be more difﬁcult to learn and therefore cause more interlanguage solutions. Moreover, a form that is more marked in the L2 than the L1 will lead to difﬁculty, whereas a form that is less marked in the L2 than the L1 will present no particular learning challenge. In addition, a form that is more marked in the L1 (as in the case of English word-ﬁnal voiced stops) is less likely to be transferred than a form that is less marked (as in the case of the German word-ﬁnal devoiced stop). This in a nutshell is the Markedness Differential Hypothesis proposed in the pioneering work of SLA phonologist Fred Eckman (1977).

3.6	CAN A CUP BREAK? TRANSFERABILITY	

In a series of seminal publications in the Netherlands, Eric Kellerman (1979, 1983, 1985) introduced an important notion in the study of L1 inﬂuences: transferability (you may also ﬁnd the term psychotypology used in SLA to refer to the same concept). Transferability refers to the claim that L1 transfer is partly a function of learners’ (conscious or subconscious) intuitions about how transferable certain phenomena are. Choices in the L1 that are perceived to be marked or more ‘language speciﬁc’ are less likely to be transferred to the L2 than choices that are perceived to be unmarked or more ‘universal’ by learners.
In Kellerman’s (1979) study, the acceptability of transitive and intransitive meanings of certain verbs was investigated with three different groups of L1 Dutch learners of English. Consider, for example, the verb break (English) and its Dutch counterpart breken. Both the transitive (breaking something) and the intransitive (something just breaks) meanings are possible in English and Dutch, as shown in these translation equivalents:

(2)	a.	He broke his leg hij brak zijn been
b.	The cup broke het kopje brak

The results of the study afforded the SLA research community a few interesting surprises. A ﬁrst group comprised Dutch students who were taking English in high school and whose proﬁciency in the L2 was just incipient. They accepted both the transitive and intransitive uses of such verbs correctly, almost 100 per cent of the time. One can argue that these learners were correct despite their beginning L2 proﬁciency probably because they were aided by the similarity in this area between English and Dutch. However, the answers given by a second group of 17to 20-yearold Dutch students were wholly unexpected. They were enrolled in the last year of high school or the ﬁrst two years of university, and therefore their proﬁciency in English was intermediate. This group correctly accepted all the transitive uses of ‘break’ (as in 2a), but they accepted the intransitive ones (as in 2b) only about 60 per cent of the time. What could have prevented this intermediate group of learners from using the L1 knowledge about breken to their advantage, just like the beginning learners in the same study obviously had? Also surprisingly, a third group of Dutch students with advanced proﬁciency (they were studying English in their third year of university) correctly accepted all transitive items (as in 2a) and, over 80 per cent of the time, they correctly accepted the intransitive items as well (as in 2b: het kopje brak, ‘the cup broke’). Granted, their performance was better than that of the intermediate group, but why would these advanced level students be correct at a rate that was lower than that of the beginning proﬁciency student group?
Kellerman suggested that the transitive option of verbs such as break (as in 2a) is intuited by learners to be semantically more transparent and syntactically more prototypical than the intransitive option (as in 2b). Things do not normally break on their own. Instead we naturally expect an animate or an inanimate agent (that is, someone or something) that does or causes the breaking. At the beginning stage of proﬁciency, Kellerman (1985) speculated, ‘[y]ounger learners, who have had less instruction and are less sophisticated meta-linguistically, seem to be unconcerned about these distinctions’ (p. 349). They rely on their L1 knowledge and successfully arrive at a fully target-like response. However, as learners develop a more sophisticated knowledge of the language, they develop ‘a sensitivity to a pragmatic distinction (implicitly known) between the causative and the non-causative meanings of a single verb’ (p. 348). They go ‘beyond success’ (an expression that Kellerman, 1985, borrows from child language acquisition researcher Annette Karmiloff-Smith) and abstain from transferring the intransitive meaning from their L1. It is as if the intransitive meaning were perceived as too ‘marked’ or too ‘Dutch-sounding’ to be judged as transferable material.
Clearly, Kellerman’s ﬁndings demonstrated that the judgement of whether something in the L1 is similar enough be transferred to the L2 is partly inﬂuenced by other factors beside externally driven L1–L2 comparisons. Based on these data, and the surprisingly different behaviour of three groups that shared the same Dutch L1 background but varied along the proﬁciency cline, Kellerman (1985) also noted that transferability interacts with L2 proﬁciency in shaping what may or may not get transferred, beyond L1–L2 apparent similarities or differences.

3.7	AVOIDANCE	

Most of the examples of negative transfer you have encountered thus far in this chapter involve so-called errors of commission during L2 speaking and writing: I not like that, Why ﬁsh can live in water?, I like the French fries. When we hear these conspicuous forms we can easily trace them back to some L1 apparent similarity or difference. Other times, however, negative L1 transfer does not lead to noticeable errors of commission or to ungrammaticalities in the L2. This is the case of avoidance, or errors of omission.
Avoidance as a systematic case of L1 inﬂuence was ﬁrst identiﬁed in an oft-cited study by Jacqueline Schachter (1974). In an analysis of the relative clauses (clauses introduced in English by who, which/that and whose) produced in 50 English L2 compositions, she found that the Chinese and Japanese L2 writers made strikingly few errors in relativization (only 14 altogether), but, upon inspection, they also produced very few relative clauses. By contrast, the Persian and Arabic L2 writers incurred many errors related to relative clauses (74 in total), but they also employed many more instances of relativization than the other two L1 background groups (328 – more than double the number of relative clauses contributed by the Chinese and Japanese essays). Drawing on the seminal crosslinguistic typological work by linguists Keenan and Comrie (1977; see also Chapter 6, section 6.11), Schachter noted that in Chinese and Japanese relativization happens very differently from English, whereas in Persian and Arabic relative clauses follow patterns that are much closer to English. She concluded that the Chinese and Japanese writers might have consciously or unconsciously avoided relative clauses in their English essays, thereby making few mistakes. Thus, an interesting consequence of avoidance is that it may lead to more accurate production. However, because in such cases learners take fewer risks in the L2, avoidance may also delay their L2 development of the given area being avoided. This shows something that many SLA researchers take for granted and that may surprise many readers at ﬁrst: making fewer errors is not always a good thing!
The notion of avoidance is intriguing and spurred considerable initial interest among SLA researchers. However, it gradually became clear that, once again, factors other than externally deﬁned L1–L2 differences needed to be considered when explaining avoidance behaviours. Three studies offer relevant evidence for this claim. All three investigated English phrasal verbs, which are twoor three-word verbs (let down, back up, look up to) that typically have one-word Latinate synonymous counterparts (disappoint, support, admire). In a ﬁrst study by Dagut and Laufer (1985), L1 Hebrew learners of English, whose mother tongue does not have phrasal verbs, showed a strong preference for the Latinate alternatives and avoided phrasal synonyms. By contrast, in a later study Laufer and Eliasson (1993) did not see evidence of such a preference among L1 Swedish learners, whose mother tongue has phrasal verbs. Interestingly, an additional avoidance effect was uncovered in both studies, related not to the L1 but to the sheer complexity of phrasal verbs. Namely, learners in the Hebrew L1 and the Swedish L1 study alike were more likely to choose a phrasal verb with a literal or semantically transparent meaning over a ﬁgurative or semantically opaque meaning. For example, a verb like turn up (meaning ‘arrive’) would be less likely to be chosen than a verb like come down (meaning ‘descend’). Complicating matters even more, in a different study with L1 Dutch learners of English, Hulstijn and Marchena (1989) found that many participants avoided phrasal verbs in their L2 English, even though their L1 Dutch also has them, and preferred one-word synonyms. Moreover, the items most avoided were precisely those that had a close equivalent translation through another phrasal verb in Dutch. The results resonate with those of Kellerman (1979) discussed in section 3.6. These verbs were apparently too Dutch-like to be judged as transferable by these learners.
The results of the three phrasal verb studies, if taken together, once again show that predictions of positive or negative transfer, including predictions of avoidance, cannot be made solely on the basis of external similarities or differences between the L1 and the L2. As Odlin (2003) points out, crosslinguistic inﬂuences will always be probabilistic, and they will always be shaped by mutually interacting forces that come from learners’ psychological judgement of transferability, learners’ current proﬁciency level in the L2 and the nature and relative complexity of the given L2 subsystem at hand.

3.8	UNDERUSE AND OVERUSE	

While interest in avoidance has subsided over the years, perhaps because it implicitly invokes conscious choices that are difﬁcult to prove, the related notions of underuse and overuse in L2 learner language have received much attention in recent SLA research. The hypothesis is that L1 knowledge can inhibit certain L2 choices and prime others, thus resulting in the underuse or overuse of certain L2 forms in spoken and written learner production.
This is what Scott Jarvis and Terence Odlin (2000) discovered when they reanalysed the L1 Finnish and L1 Swedish adolescents’ written retellings that had been elicited by Jarvis (2002), a study we will return to in the next section. Underuse of prepositions in general was attested in the sample of English written retellings produced by the Finnish-speaking adolescents. Many of them (but none of the Swedish learners they also studied) produced instances of zero preposition, as in:

(3)	The girl stole a loaf of bread the car and run away

Finnish marks location usually by adding sufﬁxes at the end of words (that is, it is what we call an agglutinative language), and this may make prepositions in English (i.e. self-standing words or so-called free morphemes placed before nouns to mark location) less salient to these learners. Thus, the agglutinative morphology of the L1 indirectly biased many learners to underuse prepositions in the L2. Together with the underuse of prepositions in general, Jarvis and Odlin found that the Finnish speaking adolescents overused the preposition in, and when they did they overextended it to many contexts where this choice is non-native-like, such as:

(4)	When they had escaped in the police car they sat under the tree

In fact, Charlie Chaplin and his new girl friend had escaped from the police car. The Swedes never overextended in to denote the meaning from. Overuse of in among the Finns seems to have been motivated by semantic transfer. Finnish has six different locative sufﬁxes that neatly mark internal and external space in combination with goal, location and source. By contrast, English prepositions can conﬂate internal location and internal goal. Jarvis and Odlin suggest that this difference in the L1–L2 semantic mapping misled Finnish learners to collapse all the uses of in into a general internal location meaning.
Underuse and overuse patterns in L2 learner language have attracted attention in recent SLA research that draws on corpus linguistic techniques. This type of research involves quantitative comparisons of parallel corpora produced by L2 learners from different L1 groups, often also compared to a baseline of the same tasks by native speakers of the target language. A volume edited by Belgium-based SLA researcher Sylvianne Granger and colleagues (Granger et al., 2002; see also Cobb, 2003) features several such studies. The ﬁndings typically suggest that there are noticeable differences in the frequency of use for the forms investigated across L1 groups, and that the L1-induced underuse or overuse of certain forms may be typical at different stages of L2 development for certain L1–L2 learner groups.

3.9	POSITIVE L1 INFLUENCES ON L2 LEARNING RATE	

Another important fact to remember about how L1 knowledge inﬂuences L2 learning is that the effects can be not only negative but also positive. For example, positive transfer explained the behaviour observed in Kellerman’s beginning learners, in section 3.6. The facilitative effects of L1 knowledge can be all too easily ignored, perhaps because instances of positive transfer are difﬁcult to identify. Particularly in production, they lead to successful choices that raise no ﬂags for teachers or interlocutors. By comparison, negative effects of L1 knowledge are much more noticeable and therefore have been more often investigated. Both are important for a complete understanding of how second language acquisition works.
Knowledge of the L1 can often have a positive impact on the rate of L2 learning. For many years now, Håkan Ringbom (1987, 1992, 2007) has been a strong advocate of the idea that relevant knowledge in the L1 can accelerate the rate of L2 learning. His research programme has focused on school-aged L2 English students in Finland. This country presents a special language ecology that has allowed him to investigate how English will be learned by two co-existing groups. The majority population consists of Finnish speakers who also learn Swedish in school starting in grade 3, 5 or 7. The minority population comprises Finnish Swedes who are L1 Swedish speakers and also learn Finnish in school from grade 3 onwards. Ringbom demonstrated that, in matters of English learning, Swedes have a great rate advantage over Finns, even though both groups speak the other group’s language, and even though they share many cultural realities because both live in the same sociopolitical and national landscape. This advantage, Ringbom suggests, accrues from the genetic and typological closeness of Swedish to English, as both are Germanic languages in the Indo-European family and thus share many typological features. Finnish, by way of contrast, is an agglutinative language (that is, a language that glues morphemes or pieces of words together) belonging to the Finno-Ugric family, and thus is genetically unrelated and typologically more distant to English.
The rate advantages afforded by knowledge of the L1 have been documented across diverse areas of L2 learning. A good example is a carefully designed study by Scott Jarvis (2002), where he investigated the use of the English article system (Swedish, like English, has articles, whereas Finnish does not). The study was conducted also in Finland, with Finnish-dominant and Swedish-dominant students learning English at school. Jarvis elicited from them written retellings of a short silent video clip modiﬁed from the famous 1936 ﬁlm Modern Times by Charlie Chaplin. He found that L1 inﬂuences from Swedish provided the Finland Swedes with an overall advantage in accuracy of use of the and zero article over the Finnish speaking learners, and that the advantage narrowed but still was noticeable at higher proﬁciency levels after two, four and six years of L2 instruction.
The case of L1 crosslinguistic beneﬁts in the learning of L2 grammatical gender is an even more striking illustration. For example, Bialystok (1997) found that L2 French learners of a German L1 background were better at marking French gender than L1 English background learners, whose language does not mark gender on nouns or adjectives. (Interestingly, and in connection to Chapter 2, she argued that, in this study at least, the L1 background factor explained more of the observed variability than the age at which learners in either group had begun learning French.) In the area of phonology, Wayland and Guion (2004) conducted a short-term laboratory study to examine the possibility of training L2 listeners to identify and discriminate between low and mid Thai tones. They found that the participants whose L1 was a tonal language (Taiwanese and Mandarin) beneﬁted from the 30minute training session more than participants who were speakers of an intonation language (English). In other words, the former participants’ prior L1 experience with tones gave them an extra advantage.
There are also attested occasions where the beneﬁts accrue from rather abstract similarities, as when a grammatical category in the L1 sheds light on a different grammatical category in the L2, thus facilitating the discovery and learning of the new category. Interesting evidence of this was gleaned in two experiments conducted in the United Kingdom by John Williams (2005). The study was designed to investigate the extent to which participants from various L1 backgrounds would be able to discover by induction alone (that is, without any explanations) a difﬁcult artiﬁcial rule for article use. This rule was motivated semantically by the animacy of the noun following each article and roughly took the following lay formulation: ‘gi and ro both mean the-near; but we say gi cow because “cow” is a living thing and ro cushion because “cushion” is a non-living object.’ For the participants, this rule must have been rather mysterious, as they were never provided with any explanation for it. Williams uncovered a systematic, facilitative relationship between knowledge of a language which encoded gender grammatically (as, for example, all Romance languages and German do) and ability to learn the gi/ro rule by induction. More speciﬁcally, the participants whose L1 had gender and article–noun agreement performed consistently better on the learning of this rule than participants from an L1 background without gender or noun–article agreement.
Finally, the same L1 fact may accrue both a disadvantage and an advantage for learning the corresponding area in the L2. Thus, Collins (2004) found that the attainment of accuracy in the use of simple past in English was slow for 91 college students in Quebec who were L1 French speakers because a single L1 form (the passé composé) corresponds to two forms in English, the past simple and the present perfect. This present perfect overlap (or crucial similarity, in Wode’s terms; cf. 3.2) is misleading and primes L1 French learners of English to overuse the present perfect, supplying it in contexts where English speakers would use the simple past. At the same time, she also observed that the same crucial similarity enables the English present perfect to be mastered earlier by French L1 learners of English when compared to other L1 groups (Collins, 2002).

3.10	FIRST LANGUAGE INFLUENCE BENEATH THE SURFACE: THE CASE OF INFORMATION STRUCTURE	

It would be inaccurate to imagine that L1 transfer, whether positive or negative, always leads to a direct translation of an L1 form into the L2 or to a glaring absence or excess of a form. The ﬁndings by Williams we have just discussed attest to this. More often than not, crosslinguistic inﬂuences yield interlanguage solutions that look very different from surface errors of either commission or omission. Often, knowledge of an L1 results in subtle inﬂuences that remain beneath the surface and are easy to miss or can be readily misinterpreted or misdiagnosed. We will illustrate this point with a well-researched case of subtle L1 transfer: information structure. Languages are known to be of two kinds with regard to this feature. Topic-prominent languages organize information in sentences through the statement of a topic, followed by the new information. Subject-prominent languages typically organize sentences around a subject and verb and mark topics only when pragmatically needed and through other exceptional means. Thus, for example, Mandarin Chinese, Japanese, Korean and Somalian are topic-prominent languages, whereas Arabic, English and Spanish are subject-prominent languages. In Japanese, topics (whether they are subjects, objects and so on) are marked with the particle wa. In English, by contrast, if we want to structure a sentence around a topic, we may use a construction such as As for my lost wallet, Peter ﬁnally found it, or we may use intonation and pauses (Noisy, those neighbours!). Information structure of the L1 can have a profound inﬂuence on grammatical and discursive choices learners make in their L2, but the effects are difﬁcult to diagnose. Findings contributed by William Rutherford and Jacqueline Schachter (Rutherford, 1983;
Schachter and Rutherford, 1979) provide a well-known illustration.
Certain non-target-like choices are typical of the essays written by Chinese L1 learners of English, as the following sentence from Schachter and Celce-Murcia (1971) shows:
(5)	There are so many Taiwan people live around the lake

At ﬁrst blush, this L2 writer appears to have omitted the relative pronoun (who/that/which) of a relative clause she arguably intended. Her writing teacher may think ‘the problem’ with this wording is caused by a relative clause error. Yet, through a detailed analysis of such interlanguage cases, Schachter and Rutherford were able to show that in fact in these cases L2 writers may be unconsciously attempting to organize information following principles of their L1. If they were right in their analyses, then the Chinese L1 writer in (5) may have meant to say something like ‘Many Taiwanese people, they live around the lake’ or ‘As for Taiwanese people, many of them live around the lake’, which is a topic-prominent way of organizing the information in this sentence. Having discovered that English has an existential construction (there is/there are) that enables information to be structured in this way (ﬁrst topic, then comment), this writer may be skillfully using it to fulﬁl an L1-induced preference in this area.
More speciﬁcally, and if we expand on the analysis proposed by Rutherford (1983), sentence (5) above can be understood as an intermediate solution placed in the middle of the following developmental continuum, from most L1-like to most L2-like information structure:

(6)	a.	Many Taiwan people, they live around the lake
b.	There are so many Taiwan people live around the lake
c.	There are many Taiwanese people who live around the lake
d.	Many Taiwanese people live around the lake

If Rutherford and Schachter are correct, then, a writing teacher who offers (6c) as a correction for (6b) may ‘teach’ this L2 writer something interesting about relative clauses in English, but the real beneﬁt for this learner would probably be to realize that, in order to sound more natural in her English writing, she needs to begin topicalizing less (reducing the use of sentences like 6a through 6c) and to organize information around subject–predicate sequences more (using more sentences like 6d).
It should be noted that moving in the reverse direction, that is, away from the information structure of a subject-prominent L1 and towards devices that favour a topic–comment structure in the L2, is also difﬁcult for L2 learners. This is what Jin (1994) found in a study of 46 L1 English speakers who were learning L2 Chinese. Participants at early stages of proﬁciency had difﬁculty adopting a topic-prominent orientation to syntax and discourse. The same ﬁnding was corroborated with 23 L2 Korean learners from an L1 English background by Jung (2004). These learners initially transferred subject-prominent clause structure from English, and only those at the more advanced levels produced the Korean topic marker (n)un to signal given or known information. The Korean double-nominative construction was even more rare. These topicalization devices were underused by beginning L2 learners even though they are common in the target language (as in khokkili-nun kho-ka kilta, ‘as for the elephant, its nose is long’).
 

With time and increasing proﬁciency, the tendency to transfer the information structure of the L1 in order to frame ideas in the L2 may gradually diminish, but the process may be rather slow. This is what Patricia Duff (1993) found in her longitudinal study of JDB, a Cambodian learner of English in Canada. JDB was at a stage before the (6a)–(6d) continuum, in that he had yet to discover the existential English construction. Instead, to preserve the topic-prominent information structure of Cambodian, he used the possessive construction have for both possessive and existential meanings, as in (7), which Duff paraphrased as meaning (7a) or (7b):
(7)	Khao Larn Camp the King of Thailand they has a small camp about three thousand people
a.	‘There is a Thai camp at Khao Larn with about three thousand people’
b.	‘The Thai government has a camp at Khao Larn with about three thousand people’
This use of have or has as an invariant form that means there is/there are has been amply documented across SLA studies. At the end of two and a half years of observation, JDB suddenly began using an interlanguage form ’s (pronounced as a voiced /z/), shown in this utterance from Duff’s recordings:
(8)	And ’s many rock by the river
Duff interprets this form as a precursor of the existential topic marker there is. That is, after two and a half years of immersion in an L2 environment, JDB managed to advance to a stage that has the potential to evolve into stage (6b) in the developmental continuum presented earlier. While this can be considered an important sign of progress in JDB’s interlanguage, it came after a considerable long time of stable use of has, the form that helped him preserve in the L2 the L1preferred information structure.
Not only is the process slow, but Carroll et al. (2000) argue that information structure in the L1 continues to exert an important if subtle inﬂuence on the L2 even at very advanced stages of proﬁciency. They noted that English and Romance languages will prefer existential constructions for the introduction of new referents as in There is a fountain on the square, whereas German will favour locational constructions of the kind Auf dem Platz ist ein Brunnen (‘On the square is a fountain’). They found that the existential construction preference was transferred by 10 L1 English speakers even though they were at very advanced levels of L2 German. This L1-inﬂuenced way of structuring information in their sentences had consequences for other narrative and discourse choices as well.

3.11	CROSSLINGUISTIC INFLUENCES ACROSS ALL LAYERS OF LANGUAGE 

Another fact about L1 transfer that is well worth remembering is that crosslinguistic inﬂuences go well beyond form–form or form–function correspondences, and that L1 knowledge across all layers of language can inﬂuence L2 solutions at the levels of form, meaning and function.
Crosslinguistic inﬂuence in the area of pragmatic competence offers a good illustration of this point. Sometimes the L1 inﬂuence on L2 pragmatic choices is obvious and rather local. For example, Takahashi (1996) studied the perceptions of transferability of requests held by 142 learners of English as a foreign language at two universities in Tokyo. She found that many chose the following formulas in English as highly appropriate for polite requests, and that this preference was related to the existence of close L1 counterparts:

(9)	a.	Would/Could you please…  V-te itadak-e-nai-deshoo-ka
b.	Would/Could you…  V-te mora-e-nai-deshoo-ka

Other times, however, what gets transferred is more subtle and holistic, for example, sociopragmatic valuations of what is socially offensive, face threatening and so on. Thus, Elite Olshtain (1983) studied crosslinguistic inﬂuences on apologies and found that learners’ sociopragmatic judgements about what situations and offenses warrant an apology were transferred from their L1. As a consequence, L2 English speakers of an L1 Hebrew background were at risk of sounding too impolite and, conversely, L2 Hebrew speakers of an English background were at risk of sounding overly polite. Similarly, Yu (2004) found that 64 L1 Taiwanese learners of English, half residing in Taiwan and half in the United States, were much more likely to reject compliments than to accept them, in a pattern that was consistent with the L1 Taiwanese baseline group and reverse to the responses of the L1 American English baseline group. Yu attributed these results to transfer from the L1 of a Taiwanese interactional style that values modesty over agreeability.
Another area which illustrates how L1 inﬂuences can cut across layers of language pertains to the semantic-functional ways of expressing thought or what ﬁrst language acquisition researcher Dan Slobin (1996) called thinking-forspeaking. This refers to the fact that languages offer speciﬁc sets of resources to frame meaning, or to schematize experience, and speakers are known to be constrained by such language-speciﬁc ways at the time when they are putting together their thoughts into language. A widely researched case is the expression of motion. In so-called satellite-framed languages, motion is typically expressed via a verb that encodes manner and some other external element, such as an adverb or a gerund, that encodes path (e.g. English to ﬂy out). In verb-framed languages, by contrast, the path is typically encoded in the verb, whereas the manner gets expressed in the external element (e.g. Spanish salir volando or ‘to leave ﬂying’). Slobin (1996) suggested that thinking-for-speaking in an L1 will be transferred into the new language by L2 learners and, furthermore, that they may never be able to restructure their L1-acquired ways of thinking for speaking when using an L2. Although he did not investigate the issue empirically, his suggestion has spurred great interest among L2 researchers. The rapidly accumulating research for the expression of motion in an L2, for example, has been reviewed by Cadierno (2008), who concluded that the results are mixed thus far. More research will be needed before we can know more about the nature of the challenges encountered when L2 learners learn to think for speaking anew in their additional language.

3.12	BEYOND THE L1: CROSSLINGUISTIC INFLUENCES ACROSS MULTIPLE LANGUAGES	

Acknowledging that in many cases people bring knowledge of multiple languages to the process of learning an additional language, SLA researchers in the last ten years have begun to ask two new questions: How will knowledge of two (or more) preexisting languages inﬂuence acquisition of the L3 (or L4, and so on)? Will the L1 still play a privileged role in L3 acquisition?
The accumulating evidence suggests that knowledge of two (or more) languages can accelerate the learning of an additional one. Research on lexical transfer in L3 acquisition has found substantial vocabulary rate advantages for multilinguals (several of the studies can be found in a pioneering volume published by Jasone Cenoz and other colleagues in Europe; Cenoz et al., 2001). The beneﬁts are particularly clear if one of the previous languages is typologically related to the L3, because in such cases there are many relevant cognates, that is, words that have a common origin and therefore have similar form and meaning in the two related languages (e.g. redundant in English and redundante in Spanish). Even in the case of unrelated multiple languages, moreover, already knowing several languages can give an overall advantage, simply because better vocabulary learning strategies have already been developed by the time the L3 is being learned. For example, Keshavarz and Astaneh (2004) reported that pre-university female students in Iran who were speakers of either Armenian and Persian or Turkish and Persian outperformed a comparison group of L1 Persian–L2 English students on an English vocabulary test, even in the absence of any cognates that would be useful for learning English vocabulary. The same general conclusion that bilingualism generally facilitates L3 acquisition rates has been reached in the area of morphosyntax. Thus, for example, Elaine Klein (1995) observed a general advantage for multilingualism when 15 high-school speakers of L3 English were asked to judge whether the separation of a preposition or a postposition from its noun phrase, or what is known as stranding (e.g. What are the boys waiting for?), was grammatical. They did considerably better than another group of learners of L2 (as opposed to L3) English. This was despite the fact that this phenomenon was absent from their L1s or L2s, since most languages of the world do not allow stranding (they favour the option For what are the boys waiting?, which is also possible in English but is rather formal-sounding).
Evidence slowly accumulating from a number of diverse perspectives strongly supports the conclusion that not only the L1, but all previously learned languages, can inﬂuence additional language learning. Which language will become the source for transfer does not appear to be random. Typological closeness is one powerful factor when competing sources of knowledge (L1 and L2) are available in the learning of the L3. Odlin and Jarvis (2004) mention examples such as the learning of English in the Basque country or in Finland, where many students are likely to be bilingual in Basque and Spanish and in Finnish and Swedish, respectively. Not surprisingly, the inﬂuence of Spanish and Swedish, which are the languages typologically closer to English, is stronger, whereas documented cases of transfer from Basque and Finnish are less pervasive. Typological closeness was also found to be the deciding factor for predicting the source of transfer in L3 acquisition in a study by Suzanne Flynn and colleagues (Flynn et al., 2004). These researchers investigated whether L3 learners of English who knew Kazakh as L1 and Russian as L2 would behave with English relativization in ways that were more similar to previous data from L1 Japanese or from L1 Spanish learners of English. The comparison was interesting because their L1, Kazakh, is typologically closer to Japanese, whereas their L2, Russian, is typologically closer to Spanish and English. The data came from an elicited imitation task in which participants were asked to repeat English relative clauses of several kinds. According to the researchers, the learners’ repetition of sentences such as The lawyer who criticized the worker called the policeman revealed developmental patterns similar to the patterns attested with the previously studied L1 Spanish learners. They concluded that these L3 English learners were transferring relevant knowledge from the typologically closer language, in this case Russian, their L2. Importantly, they concluded that the L1 does not hold a privileged status in the acquisition of additional languages.
Predicting what the source language for transfer will be demands that we go well beyond external typological relations, however. In a large study with over one thousand participants who were trilingual users of Swedish, Finnish and English, Ringbom (2001) found that the language that was typologically closer to L3 English, Swedish, was the source for transfer motivated by formal similarity between languages (so-called false friends) for both groups. Thus, for example, the lexical invention stedge, which originates in the Swedish word stege (‘ladder’) was attested in the interlanguage of Finnish-dominant as well as Swedish-dominant L3 English participants. By contrast, cases of transfer of semantic knowledge (for example, translating matches as ﬁresticks) were traced back to the L1 of participants, whether Finnish or Swedish. Interestingly, therefore, it appears that formal or surface transfer of words can come from the L1 or the L2, whichever is typologically closer to the L3, but semantic transfer is likely to have the L1 as its source.
Another interesting documentation of differential L1 and L2 inﬂuence on L3 learning involves codeswitching across the three languages of a learner. Sarah Williams and Bjorn Hammarberg (1998) showed this in an oft-cited case study of the L3 Swedish oral production by the ﬁrst author over the ﬁrst two years of her stay in Sweden. Williams was a speaker of L1 English and L2 German, which she had studied in college and subsequently developed to near-native degrees while living in Germany for six years prior to moving to Sweden. The researchers discovered that switches to the L1 were intentional and had a metalinguistic self-regulatory function (asking for help, clarifying the intended meaning); they gradually declined after the ﬁrst eight months of study. By contrast, switches to the L2, the most active language in the beginning of the study, were unconscious and involved mostly function words that aided in language production; these switches also showed a decline after the ﬁrst four months. Thus, both the L1 and the L2 inﬂuenced the L3, but the functional roles played by the each language in L3 production were not interchangeable, and their presence gradually receded over time, as the L3 developed.
In fact, proﬁciency is another factor that must be taken into account, in that L3 learners may be more prone to transferring aspects of whichever language they are more proﬁcient in, and they will gradually show different crosslinguistic sources of inﬂuence as their L3 proﬁciency increases. Margaret Thomas (1990) studied the acquisition of the Japanese reﬂexive pronoun zibun (‘self’) in a group for whom Japanese was an L3 (n = 6) and compared their behaviour on a multiple-choice comprehension test to that of an L1 English–L2 Japanese group (n = 27) and an L1 Chinese–L2 Japanese (n = 8) group. She found that the six L3 Japanese learners behaved more like the L1 English–L2 Japanese group than the L1 Chinese–L2 Japanese group. This was the case, even though the six L3 participants’ ﬁrst language, Chinese and Korean, have reﬂexive pronouns that work more like Japanese zibun and less like English herself. That is, knowledge from the L1 that was congruent with the L3 did not afford them the expected advantage. In this case, positive transfer from the L1 failed to happen, and instead negative transfer originated from the L2. Thomas speculated this was possibly because they were dominant in their L2, English.
There are possibly other additional factors to consider in the mix when transfer inﬂuences in multilingual acquisition are investigated. The order of acquisition may play a role, in the sense that perhaps the most recently learned language (especially if it is learned as a ‘foreign’ language) shows a stronger inﬂuence than the language learned earlier. In other words, perhaps the L3 is affected by the L2 more, other things being equal, because both conjure the same psychological mode of ‘talking foreign’, as Selinker and Baumgartner-Cohen (1995) call it. These are cases where the language psychologically associated as ‘foreign’ intrudes in the L3. In such scenarios, the L2 may remain nevertheless more affected by the L1, even after an L3 has been learned (Dewaele, 1998). Another observed inﬂuence is the formality of the context, as it appears that informal communication favours the intrusion of lexical choices from the L1 or L2 alike in the L3 production (Dewaele, 2001).
The study of crosslinguistic inﬂuence during L3 acquisition has only begun to ﬂourish in SLA, but the available evidence clearly points at two conclusions: that bilingualism generally facilitates L3 acquisition rates and that transfer does not always come from the L1. The discovery that the L1 does not need to have a privileged status across the board in additional language acquisition opens the door to the novel suggestion that crosslinguistic inﬂuences may occur in the opposite direction, from the L2 (or L3 and so on) to the L1. L2 effects on the L1 have indeed been documented in a collection edited by Vivian Cook (2003), and Pavlenko and Jarvis (2002) have called attention to bidirectional transfer, or the fact that ‘crosslinguistic inﬂuence can simultaneously work both ways, from L1 to L2, and from L2 to L1’ (p. 190). However, much more research is needed before conclusions can be reached in this new area of universal crosslinguistic inﬂuence.

3.13	THE LIMITS OF CROSSLINGUISTIC INFLUENCE	

As you have seen in this chapter, over its 40 years of existence the ﬁeld of SLA has contributed a wealth of research on how knowledge of the ﬁrst and other languages universally inﬂuences L2 acquisition. Let us conclude with an evaluation of the ﬁndings presented in this chapter and what they might mean beyond research contexts.
First, from an intuitive standpoint, it is all too easy to conclude the L1 is a major explanatory factor in learner language. If we hear How I do this? from a Punjabi or a Spanish learner, whose languages do not have inversion, we may conclude it is the L1 that is causing this choice. This explanation is indeed compatible with the description of these two particular L1s. However, if we sampled learners from other L1 backgrounds where inversion does exist, we would ﬁnd that at some early stage of development in the L2 they use un-inverted questions in their English interlanguage (Pienemann et al., 1988; see also Table 6.9 in Chapter 6). Thus, many errors that at ﬁrst blush might be attributed to the inﬂuence of the mother tongue can be, in fact, unrelated to the L1 and instead reﬂect developmental universal processes that have been attested in the acquisition of human language in general (and often in L1 acquisition as well, where no pre-existing knowledge of a speciﬁc language can be assumed to inﬂuence the process). In addition, many interlanguage phenomena are motivated by simultaneous L1 transfer and linguistic universal inﬂuences that conspire together to promote certain L2 solutions. For example, Spanish and Punjabi speakers of English at a given developmental level may more often produce such un-inverted questions than speakers from other L1 backgrounds at the same developmental level.
It is intriguing to ask ourselves: Just how much of learners’ obvious errors in production (that is, errors of commission) might one be able to explain away as caused by L1 transfer? In 1985, Rod Ellis tried to answer this question by polling the ﬁndings reported across seven studies of L2 English published between 1971 and 1983 (Ellis, 1985). The typical amount seemed to be in the range of 23 per cent to 36 per cent, as contributed by four studies, all involving English as a second language (ESL) adult learners of various L1 backgrounds (Arabic, German, Spanish and mixed). However, the full range across the seven studies was striking, from a low 3 per cent in the only sample of children, whose L1 was Spanish, to a highest of roughly 50 per cent in two studies involving adult learners of Chinese and Italian L1 background, respectively. This wildly varying quantitative estimation of the importance of transfer in L2 development has been cited by other researchers since then. However, by the late 1980s most SLA researchers were in agreement with Ellis’s caution that trying to ascribe all interlanguage forms attested in a given data set to either the L1 or universal inﬂuence may be a futile enterprise. There are too many variables that can affect the amount of L1 transfer that materializes for a given learner. To the ones reviewed in this chapter, we can add external variables. Interlocutors, for example, may affect the degree to which L1 transfer occurs (Beebe and Zuengler, 1983; Young, 1991).
 

Another area that has occasionally intrigued SLA researchers and language teachers is whether we can assume that L1 transfer effects are subtle and selective in some areas of language but more robust and prominent in other areas. For example, is it possible that the L1 has a less massive and more ﬂeeting inﬂuence on an area like L2 morphosyntax than on an area like L2 phonology? Might it be that transfer of pragmatic formulas (e.g. Takahashi, 1996) occurs more sporadically and at lower levels of proﬁciency, whereas the transfer of L1 sociopragmatic values (e.g. Olshtain, 1983; Yu, 2004) is more common and persists for a longer time in development? In his authoritative review of L1 transfer, Terence Odlin (2003) notes that it may be futile to pose such questions because seeking to make such comparisons across subsystems of a language is to try to ‘compar[e] the incomparable’ (p. 440). He explains that comparisons that try to quantify the incidence of L1-to-L2 transfer across subsystems are difﬁcult, among other reasons, because certain phenomena are of high frequency in any language (e.g. sounds and articles cannot be avoided for very long in production), whereas other features of the grammar may be of very low frequency. For example, relative clauses are much less frequent than noun clauses, particularly in speech, and inversion in non-question contexts (as in Not only did I warn him, I warned him repeatedly) is of even lower frequency in English. Attempts at quantifying and comparing the amount of transfer observed across these areas and for different types of L1 knowledge would be difﬁcult to interpret.
Odlin (2003) makes an important and seldom-voiced point that helps put transfer phenomena into a wider perspective. He notes that the macro context can also shape the nature and magnitude of crosslinguistic inﬂuences. He contrasts the case of L2 learning in postcolonial contexts, such as English in India and Nigeria, with the case of L2 formal instruction of a foreign language in expanding circle countries, such as English in China or Spain. In the latter contexts, teachers may warn students against false friends, literal translations and the dangers of relying on the mother tongue when learning a foreign language. In postcolonial contexts, by contrast, transfer occurs frequently and freely. In such contexts the learning and use of an L2 is characterized by a great degree of creativity involving crosslinguistic inﬂuences, and L1-induced transfer seems to be a major strategy for the indigenization or appropriation of a language by the postcolonial speech community. It should be also noted that in a variety of contexts learners may not wish to be identiﬁed with speakers of the L2, and creative L1 transfer processes may be a form of resistance and appropriation of the target language (see, for example, Seidlhofer, 2004). As with the topic of age and critical periods that we examined in Chapter 2, it may be that a more bilingual orientation and a less intent comparative approach of native (monolingual) and non-native (bilingual) speakers may bring further advances in the area of crosslinguistic inﬂuences in future SLA generations.