THE LINGUISTIC ENVIRONMENT


Much of our knowledge about how people learn additional languages was forged during the 1980s and 1990s under a cognitive-interactionist perspective on L2 learning. Cognitive-interactionism is associated with the work in developmental psychology by Jean Piaget (e.g. 1974) and refers to the position that multiple internal (cognitive) and external (environmental) factors reciprocally interact (hence the word ‘interactionist’) and together affect the observed processes and outcomes of a phenomenon – in this case, additional language learning. It is noteworthy that internal cognition is assumed to be the locus of learning (hence the word ‘cognitive’ in the term) and that a clear separation between cognitive-internal and social-external worlds is presupposed, since how the two interact is the object of inquiry. More recent SLA research inﬂuenced by a number of related sociocultural perspectives has challenged the assumptions of cognitive-interactionism, and we will discuss these other ways of conceiving of language learning in Chapter 10. In the present chapter and the following one, however, we will examine ﬁndings about the environment and cognition that have been gleaned using a cognitive-interactionist prism.
Languages are almost always learned with and for others, and these others generate linguistic evidence, rich or poor, abundant or scarce, that surrounds learners. Knowing about the language beneﬁts afforded by the environment is thus important for achieving a good understanding of how people learn additional languages. In this chapter, we will examine environmental inﬂuences on L2 learning. We open with the story of Wes (Schmidt, 1983), who is probably the most frequently cited, admired and puzzled-over exemplar in the long gallery of learners that SLA researchers have mounted to date through the methodology of case study (Duff, 2008). He stands for someone who became particularly adept at ‘initiating, maintaining, and regulating relationships and carrying on the business of living’ in his additional language (Schmidt, 1983, p. 168) but remained unable to master the L2 grammar despite what seemed to be sufﬁcient time and ideal environmental conditions. His story illustrates well the selective impact that the linguistic environment exerts on L2 learning.

4.1	WES: ‘I’M NEVER LEARNING, I’M ONLY JUST LISTEN THEN TALK’       
Wes was a young Japanese artist who learned English without instruction in Honolulu. His progress over the ﬁrst three years of intermittent but increasingly prolonged residence in the L2 environment was chronicled by Richard Schmidt (1983) at the University of Hawai‘i. Schmidt kept rich ﬁeld notes over the duration of the study and collected 18 hours of English oral data, in the form of letters that Wes tape-recorded over three years during his visits to Tokyo, to update people back in Honolulu about personal and professional matters. Towards the ﬁnal months of the study, Schmidt also recorded an additional three hours of casual conversations in Honolulu.
In his early thirties, Wes emigrated from Tokyo to Honolulu by choice, in a ﬁnancially and socially comfortable position, in pursuit of expanded international recognition in his already well-established career. Perhaps two features can be singled out as most deﬁning of Wes’s personality. One is his strong professional identity as an artist, captured in excerpt (1) from an oral letter recorded into the third year of the study (Schmidt, 1983, p. 158):

(1)	you know I’m so lucky / because ah my business is painting / also my hobby is painting / … this is my life / cannot stop and paint / you know nobody push / but myself I’m always push /

The second deﬁning feature is Wes’s predisposition towards communication. His was the kind of social personality that avidly seeks people and engages in skillfully designed reciprocal interaction. This is illustrated in excerpt (2), also recorded around the same time as the previous excerpt:

(2)	well / I like talk to people you know / um / I’m always listen then start talk / then listen / always thinking my head / then talk / some people you know only just talk, talk, talk, talk /
(Ibid., p. 160)

Schmidt describes Wes as someone who was conﬁdent and felt comfortable in his own identity as Japanese and at the same time showed extremely positive attitudes towards Hawai‘i and the United States throughout the three years of study. Most of his acquaintances and friends, and most of his clients and art brokers, were L1 English speakers, and he had an L1 English-speaking roommate. In Schmidt’s estimation, by the third year of study, he was using English in his daily interactions between 75 and 90 per cent of the time.
Wes had arrived in the United States with ‘minimal’ communicative ability in English (p. 140), and within three years he was able to function in the L2 during ‘promotional tours, exhibitions of paintings [… and] appearances and demonstrations by the artist’ that demanded of him whole-day, around-the-clock interactions and a mixture of demonstration painting and informal lecturing, all in English (p. 144). This transformation of his second language capacities seems remarkable. A close analysis of his language production in the recorded letters and conversations, however, revealed a more ambivalent picture. Evidence of the greatest strength and improvement was found in the area of oral discourse competence. Wes quickly became skillful and expressive in his conversations and grew able to narrate, describe and joke in rather sophisticated ways. Most interlocutors considered him a charming conversationalist who never ran out of topics and often took charge of steering conversations. At the other extreme, in the area of Wes’s grammatical competence, Schmidt uncovered puzzling stagnation.
For example, the ﬁndings for verbal tense morphology are telling. For all three years, Wes’s verbs were characterized by overuse of –ing attached consistently to certain verbs denoting activities (e.g. joking, planning, training, touching), the use of past in only high-frequency irregular forms that can be memorized as items (e.g. went, sent, told, saw, said, met, bought), a complete absence of –ed and an overwhelming preference to make interlocutors understand the intended tense and aspect of his messages via lexical means such as adverbs (e.g. all day, always, right now, yesterday, tomorrow). In other words, over three years of rich exposure to and meaningful use of English, Wes’s temporal L2 system remained rudimentary, stuck in the transition between the lexical marking stage and the next stage of development, where tense and aspect morphology begins to deploy (Bardovi-Harlig, 2000; you will appreciate the signiﬁcance of these ﬁndings better if you read Chapter 6, section 6.10). Likewise, his articles and plurals improved minimally, from practically no occurrence in the beginning of the study to accuracy in up to a meagre third of the relevant cases, but even then in great part because of repeated occurrence of these forms in chunked phrases like n years old or n years ago (for plural –s), and a little (bit) X (for use of the indeﬁnite article a).
Regarding progress in the two areas of sociolinguistic and strategic competence, Wes presented a mixed proﬁle, less extreme than the positive picture of discourse competence or the negative picture of grammatical competence. On the one hand, he developed a certain sociolinguistic repertoire that enabled him to issue requests, hint and make suggestions, if often strongly couched in indirectness:

(3)	maybe curtain
[maybe you should open the curtain]
(4)	this is all garbage [put it out]
(5)	uh, you like this chair? [please move over]

Since Japanese is well known for its indirect politeness (Ide et al., 2005), this preference may have been transferred from his L1.
On the other hand, this repertoire, constrained by his limits in sheer grammatical resources, remained formulaic. That is, the formulas and chunks that Wes so adeptly used did not serve him as a springboard into the process of analysis towards rules, or what is known as bootstrapping from formulas to rules. As we will see in Chapter 6, section 6.4, this gradual process has been posited to occur with successful L2 development (e.g. Wong Fillmore, 1979; Myles et al., 1999; Wray, 2002), but did not happen in Wes’s case. Likewise, his strategic competence to solve communication problems developed rapidly, as he availed himself of heuristics that helped him solve immediate meaning-making needs, driven as he was by his intense social and conversational will to communicate. By comparison, over the three years of study Schmidt never caught Wes using the kinds of strategy that would foster longer-term learning, such as consulting a dictionary or asking his interlocutors metalinguistic questions about subtle differences or idiomatic appropriacy. Furthermore, in the many conversational excerpts that Schmidt (1983) offers, we ﬁnd no trace of interactional moves like the ones we will discuss in this chapter, and which have been posited to foster learning of the language code. For example, Wes does not appear to incorporate into his utterances new language or more precise wordings that are offered by interlocutors, and when faced with signals of non-understanding from others, he repeats exactly what he just said or he explains what he meant with entirely new utterances, unable or unwilling to revise and ﬁne-tune his language choices.
How can Wes’s mixed success story of language learning be explained? Schmidt proposed that ‘sensitivity to form’ or the drive to pay attention to the language code (p. 172) seems to be the single ingredient missing in Wes’s efforts to learn the L2. Despite optimal attitudes towards the L2 and its members and plentiful and meaningful participation in English interactions, Wes was driven as a learner by an overriding investment in ‘message content over message form’ (p. 169). As he himself puts it, ‘I know I’m speaking funny English / because I’m never learning / I’m only just listen / then talk’ (p. 168). Schmidt concluded that positive attitudes and an optimal environment will afford the linguistic data needed for learning, but that the learning will not happen unless the learner engages in active processing of those data. In other words, grammar acquisition cannot be successful without applying ‘interest’, ‘attention’ and ‘hard work’ (p. 173) to the task of cracking the language code.
With this conclusion, the kernel of the Noticing Hypothesis was born (discussed in section 4.6). Nevertheless, cognitive-interactionist SLA researchers interested in the environment spent most of the decade of the 1980s exploring the four ingredients of attitudes, input, interaction and output before the insights ﬁnally converged into an emerging consensus that attention was the needed ﬁfth ingredient to consider. Let us examine each ingredient and its associated hypothesis.

4.2	ACCULTURATION AS A PREDICTIVE EXPLANATION FOR L2 LEARNING SUCCESS?	

Obviously, the L2 environment engenders in learners certain attitudes that have affective and social–psychological bases and that must be considered if we want to understand L2 learning. In the late 1970s, John Schumann at the University of California Los Angeles focused on attitudes and proposed the Pidginization Hypothesis, also known as the Acculturation Model (explained in Schumann, 1976). The proposal was inspired by his case study of Alberto, a 33-year-old immigrant worker from Costa Rica who appeared to be unable to move beyond basic pidginized English after almost a year and a half in Boston, and even after he was provided with some individualized instruction. Schumann predicted that great social distance between the L1 and L2 groups (as is the case of circumstantial immigrants, who speak a subordinate minority language and are surrounded by a powerful language of the majority), and an individual’s affective negative predispositions towards the target language and its members (e.g. culture shock, low motivation) may conspire to create what he characterized as a bad learning situation that causes learners to stagnate into a pidgin-like state in their grammar, without inﬂections or mature syntax. Conversely, he predicted that the more acculturated a learner can become (that is, the closer to the target society and its members, socially and psychologically), the more successful his or her eventual learning outcomes will be.
Schmidt’s (1983) study of Wes was originally designed as a test case of the Acculturation Model and, as we have seen, it provided strong evidence against attitudes being the only or most important explanatory mechanism for L2 learning success. In response to the new evidence, Schumann eventually modiﬁed his model in important ways (Schumann, 1990, 1997). It should also be recognized that explanations that make acculturation into the target society a necessary prerequisite for successful language acquisition lend themselves to dangerous interpretations. Success and failure in L2 learning are too complex to be explained by static membership into a group or by individual choice alone. Furthermore, meritocratic explanations that everyone can learn an L2 well, if they only want it badly enough and try hard enough, do not stand research scrutiny. Nevertheless, affective and social–psychological variables that arise from non-linguistic dimensions of the environment remain important when explaining L2 learning. We will examine them in Chapters 8 and 9, through a social–psychological prism, and in Chapter 10, through a sociocultural and poststructuralist lens.

4.3	INPUT FOR COMPREHENSION AND FOR LEARNING	

The environment affords learners input, or linguistic data produced by other competent users of the L2. Also in the late 1970s, Stephen Krashen at the University of Southern California formally proposed a central role in L2 learning for input in his Comprehensible Input Hypothesis (best formulated in Krashen, 1985). This proposal drew on his extensive educational work with English-language learners in California’s schools and communities.
According to Krashen, the single most important source of L2 learning is comprehensible input, or language which learners process for meaning and which contains something to be learned, that is, linguistic data slightly above their current level. This is what Krashen termed i+1. Learners obtain comprehensible input mostly through listening to oral messages that interlocutors direct to them and via reading written texts that surround them, such as street signs, personal letters, books and so on. When L2 learners process these messages for meaning (which they will most likely do if the content is personally relevant, and provided they can reasonably understand them), grammar learning will naturally occur. Krashen proposed this role for input on the assumption that the mechanisms of L2 learning are essentially similar to the mechanisms of L1 learning: in order to build an L1 grammar, children only need to be exposed to the language that parents or caretakers direct to them for the purpose of meaning making.
The strong claim that comprehensible input is both necessary and sufﬁcient for L2 learning proved to be untenable in light of ﬁndings gleaned by Schmidt (1983) and by many others, who documented minimal grammatical development despite ample meaningful opportunities to use the language, even with young L2 learners
– for example, children attending French immersion (Swain, 1985) and regular English-speaking schools (Sato, 1990). Input is undoubtedly necessary, but it cannot be sufﬁcient.
In addition, the expectation that more comprehension necessarily brings about more acquisition has not been borne out by the empirical evidence. Several researchers have noted that comprehension and acquisition are two distinct processes (e.g. Sharwood Smith, 1986), and some studies (e.g. Doughty, 1991; Loschky, 1994) have shown that learners can comprehend more than they acquire and can acquire more than they comprehend. In later years, Krashen himself has only indirectly engaged in research that would shed light on the relationship between comprehension and acquisition, placing his efforts on public advocacy of extensive reading (or voluntary reading, as he prefers to call it; Krashen, 2004) and bilingual education (Krashen and McField, 2005). Nevertheless, the suggestive evidence of a dissociation between comprehension and acquisition points at the need to understand the relationship between the two processes better in the future. The need is particularly important in connection with knowledge about optimal schooling conditions for linguistic minorities in mainstream classrooms, where educational goals related to the learning of content and of language are equal in importance (Mohan et al., 2001; Valdés, 2001; Schleppegrell, 2004).

4.4	INTERACTION AND NEGOTIATION  FOR MEANING	

Much in the linguistic environment, particularly in naturalistic settings, but also in today’s communicative classrooms, comes to learners in the midst of oral interaction with one or more interlocutors, rather than as exposure to monologic spoken or written discourse. In the early 1980s, Michael Long proposed the Interaction Hypothesis (best explained and updated in Long, 1996). The hypothesis grew out of work conducted for his dissertation at the University of California Los Angeles, in which college-level ESL learners were paired to interact with English native-speaking pre-service and in-service teachers of ESL. It extended Krashen’s proposal by connecting it in novel ways with studies in discourse analysis that had entered the ﬁeld via the work of SLA founder Evelyn Hatch (1978) and work done on caretaker speech and foreigner talk in neighbouring disciplines. At the time, Long agreed with Krashen that learning happens through comprehension, and that the more one comprehends, the more one learns. However, he departed from the strong input orientation of the times by focusing on interaction and proposing that the best kind of comprehensible input learners can hope to obtain is input that has been interactionally modiﬁed, in other words, adjusted after receiving some signal that the interlocutor needs some help in order to fully understand the message.
Interactional modiﬁcations are initiated by moves undertaken by either interlocutor in reaction to (real or perceived) comprehension problems, as they strive to make meaning more comprehensible for each other, that is, to negotiate for meaning. Typically, negotiation episodes begin with clariﬁcation requests if non-understanding is serious (e.g. whaddya mean? uh? pardon me?), conﬁrmation checks when the interlocutor is somewhat unsure she has understood the message correctly (e.g. you mean X? X and Y, right?) and comprehension checks if one interlocutor suspects the other speaker may not have understood what she said (e.g. you know what I mean? do you want me to repeat?). Following signals of a need to negotiate something, the other interlocutor may conﬁrm understanding or admit non-understanding, seek help, repeat her words exactly or try to phrase the message differently. Often this two-way process makes both interlocutors modify their utterances in ways that not only increase the comprehensibility of the message but also augment the salience of certain L2 forms and make them available to the learner for learning (Pica, 1994). This is illustrated in (6):

(6)	Jane:	All right now [reading from the script], above the sun place the squirrel. He’s right on top of the sun.
Hiroshi: What is … the word? Jane:	OK. The sun.
Hiroshi: Yeah, sun, but
Jane:	Do you know what the sun is? Hiroshi: Yeah, of course. Wh-what’s the
Jane:	Squirrel. Do you know what a squirrel is? Hiroshi: No.
Jane:	OK. You’ve seen them running around on campus. They’re little furry animals. They’re short and brown and they eat nuts like crazy.
(Gass and Varonis, 1994, p. 296)

When interlocutors like Jane and Hiroshi work through messages in these ways, engaging in as much (or as little) negotiation for meaning as needed, we might say that they are generating tailor-made comprehensible input, or learner-contingent i+1, at the right level the particular interlocutor needs to understand the message. It was for this reason that Long predicted interactionally modiﬁed input would be more beneﬁcial than other kinds of input. For example, it may be better than unmodiﬁed or authentic input (as in the listening or reading of authentic texts) but also better than pre-modiﬁed input (as in graded readers), which often means simplifying the language, thus risking the elimination of the +1 in the i+1 equation. Interactional modiﬁcations have the potential to bring about comprehension in a more individualized or learner-contingent fashion, with repetitions and redundancies rather than simpliﬁcation. Thus, an important general beneﬁt of interactional modiﬁcations is their contingency, in that learners are potentially engaging in what educational researchers would call just-in-time learning, or learning at the right point of need.

4.5	OUTPUT AND SYNTACTIC PROCESSING DURING PRODUCTION	

Where there is interaction, learners engage by necessity not only in comprehending and negotiating messages but also in making meaning and producing messages, that is, in output. By the mid-1980s, it was becoming apparent to SLA researchers that positive attitudes and plentiful input and interaction, while important, were not sufﬁcient to guarantee successful grammatical acquisition. It was at this juncture that Canadian researcher Merrill Swain (1985) at the University of Toronto formulated her Pushed Output Hypothesis (you will also see the terms Comprehensible Output Hypothesis and Output Hypothesis used interchangeably). She did so drawing on results of large-scale assessment of the linguistic outcomes of French immersion schools in Ontario, an English-speaking province of Canada. Speciﬁcally, she compared the oral and written performances of children who had studied in immersion schools against the performances on the same tasks by same-age L1 French peers. She found patterns that remarkably resonate with Schmidt’s (1983) ﬁndings for Wes (see section 4.1). School immersion from kindergarten to sixth grade afforded these children optimal development in discourse competence (as well as optimal comprehension abilities and school content learning), but not in grammatical competence or in sociolinguistic competence for aspects that demanded grammatical means (as opposed to formulaic means) for their realization, such as the French choice between vous/tu (formal/informal ‘you’) and the use of conditional as a politeness marker (Swain, 1985). She concluded that the missing element in this school immersion context was sufﬁcient opportunities for the children to actually use the language in meaningful ways, through speaking and writing.
Comprehension does not usually demand the full processing of forms. During comprehension (e.g. when children read textbooks and listen to teacher explanations in school), it is possible to get the gist of messages by relying on key content words aided by knowledge of the world, contextual clues, and guessing. For example, in yesterday I walked three miles, we may hear ‘yesterday’ and not even need to hear the morpheme –ed in order to know our interlocutor is telling us about something that happened in the past. By the same token, reliance on this kind of lexical processing is less possible during production, because the psycholinguistic demands of composing messages force speakers to use syntactic processing to a much greater extent. Thus, Swain proposed that ‘producing the target language may be the trigger that forces the learner to pay attention to the means of expression needed in order to successfully convey his or her own intended meaning’ (p. 249). This is particularly true if interlocutors do not understand and push for a better formulation of the message, if learners push themselves to express their intended meaning more precisely or if the nature of what they are trying to do with words (i.e. the task) is demanding, cognitively and linguistically.
Swain’s pushed output hypothesis created a space to conceive of a competenceexpanding role for production that had not been possible before the mid-1980s, when most researchers could envision a causal role in L2 learning only for comprehension. Even to this date, many scholars view production as merely useful in building up ﬂuency (e.g. de Bot, 1996; VanPatten, 2004). Yet, a focus on pushed output allows for the possibility that production engages crucial acquisition-related processes (Izumi, 2003; see section 4.9). Optimal L2 learning must include opportunities for language use that is slightly beyond what the learner currently can handle in speaking or writing, and production which is meaningful and whose demands exceed the learner’s current abilities is the kind of language use most likely to destabilize internal interlanguage representations. By encouraging risk-full attempts by the learner to handle complex content beyond current competence, such conditions of language use may drive learning.

4.6	NOTICING AND ATTENTION AS MODERATORS OF AFFORDANCES IN THE ENVIRONMENT	

Can we then conclude that acculturated attitudes, comprehensible input, negotiated interaction and pushed output are the four ingredients we need to explain optimal L2 learning? Not quite. As you will well remember from section 4.1, Wes enjoyed all four ingredients to no avail, at least for the mastery of the L2 grammar. Attention to formal detail in the input seemed to be missing and perhaps needed. The insights Schmidt gained from studying Wes and from a later case study of himself learning Portuguese during a ﬁve-month stay in Rio de Janeiro (Schmidt and Frota, 1986) led him to formally propose the Noticing Hypothesis in the early 1990s (best explained in Schmidt, 1995). He claimed that, in order to learn any aspect of the L2 (from sounds, to words, to grammar, to pragmatics), learners need to notice the relevant material in the linguistic data afforded by the environment. Noticing refers to the brain registering the new material, with some ﬂeeting awareness at the point of encounter that there is something new, even if there is no understanding of how the new element works, and possibly even if there is no reportable memory of the encounter at a later time (see Chapter 5, sections 5.11 through 5.13). Since it is difﬁcult to distinguish absence of noticing from inability to remember and report the experience of noticing at a later time, Schmidt (2001) concluded cautiously that the more L2 learners notice, the more they learn, and that learning without noticing (that is, subliminal learning), even if it exists in other domains of human learning, plays a minimal role in the challenging business of learning a new language.
The capacity to attend to the language code can be internally or externally fostered. Instances of noticing can be driven from within the learner, as when she struggles to put a sentence together and express her thoughts and in the process discovers something new. They can also be encouraged by external means, for example, through a lesson orchestrated by a teacher, a question or reaction from an interlocutor, and so on. Through such internal and external means, learners pay attention to the existence of new features of the L2 (Schmidt, 1995), become aware of locatable gaps between their utterances and those of interlocutors (Schmidt and Frota, 1986) and discover holes in what they are able to express with their given linguistic resources in the L2 (Swain and Lapkin, 1995). Thus, attention and noticing act as ﬁlters that moderate the contributions of the environment. We will scrutinize attention and noticing in more depth in Chapter 5, when we examine cognition.

4.7	TWO GENERATIONS OF INTERACTION STUDIES	

Of the ﬁve environmental ingredients examined by cognitive-interactionists, the most exhaustively studied has been interaction. A ﬁrst generation of interaction studies can be situated in an intellectual space between Long’s dissertation in 1980 and the mid-1990s. It focused on negotiation for meaning and comprehension and concentrated on three goals: (a) describing how negotiation for meaning unfolds; (b) specifying the contextual factors related to interlocutor and task that stimulate the greatest amounts of negotiation for meaning; and (c) investigating beneﬁts of interaction for comprehension. The ﬁrst goal yielded a long lineage of processoriented investigations, authoritatively reviewed by Pica (1992, 1994), that described the discourse of dyads interacting orally and developed a methodology for the identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of not only negotiation moves but also learner responses to them. This line of research also established that not only adults, but children as well, are capable of L2 negotiations using the same range of strategies as adults, although they disprefer comprehension checks and instead rely heavily on selfand other-repetition (Oliver, 1998). The second goal was fuelled by the reasoning that if negotiation-rich interaction facilitates L2 learning, we will want to ensure learners engage in negotiations by design. Its pursuit resulted in a wealth of ﬁndings regarding interlocutor and task elements that engender high amounts of negotiation, reviewed by Pica et al. (1993). The ﬁnal goal to establish links between negotiated interaction and improved comprehension also met with success in a number of studies that showed that the more interlocutors negotiated, the more they comprehended, and that opportunities to negotiate led to better levels of comprehension than providing exposure to either unmodiﬁed or premodiﬁed input (e.g. Pica et al., 1987; Yano et al., 1994).
This ﬁrst generation of interaction work was vibrant during the 1980s and early 1990s. Two oft-cited publications in the mid-1990s, a study by Gass and Varonis (1994) and another by Loschky (1994), marked the prelude towards a second generation.
Following Long’s seminal work, researchers had always looked at learner reactions to negotiation moves on the ﬂy. In 1994, Susan Gass at Michigan State University and her colleague Evangeline Varonis helped advance thinking about the acquisitional consequences of interaction by inspecting, for the ﬁrst time, the beneﬁts in subsequent production. They investigated 16 dyads of native and nonnative speakers who had to work through a task that involved giving instructions for placing 20 objects on a board depicting an outdoor scene. In the ﬁrst trial, the native-speaking member held the information to be read and the non-nativespeaking member was the receiver of that information. Only half of the dyads were allowed to interrupt the reading of the script and interact, as Hiroshi and Jane did in excerpt (6) earlier. Following the ﬁrst task, which lasted about 20 minutes, there was a similar second task, in which the researchers asked the dyad members to reverse roles. Now the L2 speaker was to hold all the information, whereas the native-speaking member of the dyad was responsible for placing the same 20 objects correctly on a different board. During the second trial, learners who had been allowed to interact were observed to recycle and incorporate input afforded by their interlocutors during the ﬁrst task. The same kind of transfer of discourse strategies did not occur in the data of the remaining eight dyads who had not interacted. Gass and Varonis conclude encouragingly that negotiated interaction ‘focuses a learner’s attention on linguistic form, on ways of creating discourse’ (1994, p. 298).
Ironically, Lester Loschky’s (1994) contribution to the advancement of interaction work was motivated by disappointing ﬁndings when, for the ﬁrst time, he directly examined the relationship between comprehension and acquisition in a quasi-experimental study carried out for his Master’s thesis at the University of Hawai‘i. He targeted the acquisition of a set of L2 Japanese vocabulary and a locative grammar rule and included three treatment groups. When the groups were compared on preand post-tests, he found that interactionally modiﬁed input resulted in better comprehension than no opportunity to interact plus either authentic or pre-modiﬁed input, yet all three conditions led to similar amounts of learning of the targets. Loschky attributed the equal learning to the attentional demands that arose from the tasks used in the study. Speciﬁcally, he argued that the task design made the use of the vocabulary set and the locative structure so singularly useful and salient to the participants that all of them apparently were able to show gains on the post-tests regardless of condition. In a related publication, Loschky and Bley-Vroman (1993) coined the term ‘task-essentialness’ to refer to such a desirable quality in task design.

4.8	THE EMPIRICAL LINK BETWEEN INTERACTION AND ACQUISITION        

The next quasi-experimental interaction study, a doctoral dissertation at the University of Sydney by Alison Mackey (published in Mackey, 1999), was the ﬁrst to report positive ﬁndings for the link between interaction and acquisition. She found that out of 34 intermediate ESL adult learners working with native speakers in dyads, only the learners in the 14 dyads who were allowed and encouraged to interact showed substantial improvement in their use of English questions on the immediate post-test. These gains were maintained on two delayed post-tests a week and again a month later.
 
Mackey (1999) opened the way for more and more studies that have turned to the cognitive rationale of the updated interaction hypothesis (Long, 1996) and have examined the link between interaction and acquisition directly. This second generation of interaction work has yielded a substantial number of studies characterized by: (a) product-oriented designs that include preand post-tests; (b) the measurement of learning gains on particular forms targeted during task-based interactions; and sometimes (c) the inclusion of measures of noticing (see Chapter 5) that may help clarify the posited causal link between interaction and acquisition. In fact, the second generation has now been synthesized in two meta-analyses that have furnished robust evidence for the facilitative role of interaction with the learning of L2 grammar rules and vocabulary.
Meta-analysis is a methodology that enables the researcher to combine the quantitative ﬁndings accumulated across many similar studies into statistical aggregations that are more than the sum of the parts and aim to reveal the pattern of evidence in a given research domain (Norris and Ortega, 2006). When the studies that make up the meta-analysis contribute comparisons of an experimental group and a control or baseline group, the results are usually reported in an effect size index called Cohen’s d, which shows how many standard deviation units separate the average performance of one group from the other. A difference in favour of the treatment group of about half a standard deviation unit (d = 0.50) can be considered of medium size, and it is the equivalent of an increase in score from the 50th percentile to the 67th percentile for that group. A difference of 0.80 or higher, equivalent to raising scores from the 50th to the 77th percentile or higher, suggests that the impact of the treatment is large.
The ﬁrst interaction meta-analysis was conducted by Keck et al. (2006), who combined the empirical evidence yielded by 14 task-based interaction studies published between 1994 and 2003 investigating English, Japanese and Spanish as target languages. They found that the gains for groups who used the targeted L2 forms during task-based interaction were substantial, with an average effect size around d = 0.90, that is, almost a standard deviation unit better than the baseline groups. These gains were sustained and even grew somewhat stronger for the ten interaction studies that featured delayed post-tests, scheduled as soon as one week and as late as two months after the interactional treatment. Keck et al. also found that in a few cases when primary researchers had striven by design to make the targeted forms and vocabulary essential for completion of the tasks (in Loschky and Bley-Vroman’s 1993 sense), the effects not only endured but grew stronger (d = 1.66) over a lag period of up to about a month. The second meta-analysis was conducted by Mackey and Goo (2007). It incorporated an additional 14 studies and covered publications up to 2007. The researchers found an overall average effect size of d = 0.75 for interaction groups when compared to minimal or no interaction groups. In addition, with more studies to aggregate, an interesting difference emerged regarding the effects of negotiation on grammar learning, as opposed to vocabulary learning. Namely, average grammar beneﬁts were initially of medium size (d = 0.59) and only grew stronger and became large (d = 1.07) when measured up to a month after the interaction had taken place.
 An important insight from both meta-analyses, and one that lends support to early claims by Gass and Varonis (1994) and Mackey (1999), is that the beneﬁts of interaction on L2 learning may need some time to manifest themselves. Judging from the insights offered by the two meta-analyses, a long-term view on the beneﬁts of interaction may be particularly important in the future, when a new generation of interaction researchers may become interested in assessing longitudinally the L2 grammar learning that occurs through task-essential use of the new L2 material.

4.9	OUTPUT  MODIFICATION	

Work on the acquisition value of productive language use, initiated by Swain (1985), has been pursued by a number of cognitive-interactionist researchers. A dual focus on negotiation for meaning and output has been increasingly more common, for example, in the work of Teresa Pica at the University of Pennsylvania and, more recently, in the studies conducted by Kim McDonough at Northern Arizona University. Both contributors have paid close attention to how learners respond to negotiation for meaning moves, or what initially Pica called interlanguage modiﬁcations (see Pica, 1992, 1994) and is more frequently known today as output modiﬁcation (McDonough, 2005). Swain herself has somewhat departed from this line of work by reconceptualizing her Output Hypothesis into a sociocultural framework (Swain, 1995, 2000) that we will examine in Chapter 10. Nevertheless, work by Belgian researcher Kris Van den Branden, Syrian researcher Ali Shehadeh and Japanese researcher Shinichi Izumi has continued to build on three competence-expanding functions for output that Swain (1995, 2000) identiﬁed: it promotes noticing of gaps and holes, which in turn pushes learners to revise their utterances; it can carry a metalinguistic function when learners negotiate forms, not only meaning, and reﬂect upon them; and it facilitates hypothesis testing when new forms are tried out in production and feedback is received from others as to their success and appropriacy.
In a rationale that resembles that of Gass and Varonis (1994) but included preand post-test measurement of gains, Van den Branden (1997) posited that the beneﬁts of interaction would be most immediately evident in the quality of the subsequent output produced two hours later after the interaction. The participants were 16 11and 12-year-old learners of Dutch, most of whom were home speakers of Berber as an L1 and all of whom had been schooled in Dutch since the age of three. They were asked to solve a murder case based on pictures. Eight of the L2 students were paired with a Dutch native-speaking friend from the same class. Another eight did the task one-on-one with the researcher, who systematically provided them with moves that were intended to push their output. A third group of eight students with Dutch as L1 acted as a comparison. The ﬁndings showed that all L2 learners extensively modiﬁed their output in response to negotiation moves. How they chose to do so depended not so much on whether the interlocutor was a peer or the adult researcher, but on the type of negotiation move they received. For example, a yes/no acknowledgement was more likely to be issued in response to a conﬁrmation check (e.g. you mean X?), whereas more extensive modiﬁcation was likely to ensue in response to clariﬁcation requests (e.g. pardon me?). Comparing the picture description task done for the pre-test with that of the post-test, Van den Branden found that the two interaction groups produced more language on the post-test (a productivity advantage) and provided more complete information (an information quality advantage). He concluded that negotiation indeed engenders pushed output.
The observation that different types of negotiation moves shape different kinds of interlanguage modiﬁcations was initially made by Pica (e.g. Pica et al., 1989). The same idea was later developed by Shehadeh (2001) into a careful taxonomy for the study of learner response to negotiation moves or output modiﬁcation. For example, the learner may ignore the signal, fail to repair the problem, express difﬁculty (I don’t know how to say it in English), repeat the previous utterance of the interlocutor without change, insert irrelevant information or branch into a new topic (pp. 455–6). The learner can also respond by modifying her utterance and revising it into a more target-like version, or what has been called repair, as shown in (7):

(7)	Learner 1: two small bottle Learner 2: two small what?
Learner 1: bot (1.0) small bottles
(Shehadeh, 2001, p. 456)

Shehadeh’s work also drew attention to a type of modiﬁcation of output that previous research had neglected: self-initiated output modiﬁcation, or selfinitiated repair, a concept that is borrowed from Conversation Analysis (Schegloff et al., 1977). As understood in cognitive-interactionist SLA work, the category refers to an attempt to self-correct that is not prompted by an interlocutor. It can be signalled by a silence, an overt comment like I mean, a cut-off or abandonment of an utterance, or the use of hesitation devices like eh, emm and er (pp. 456–7). For example:

(8)	NNS: yes because if the woman is (0.8) the wife always go out (0.6) goes out and left his his husband eh (1.0) her husband and her son in the home (0.7) at home it’s it’s not reasonable for for …
(Shehadeh, 2001, p. 437)

In his studies, Shehadeh has found robust evidence that output modiﬁcation occurs more frequently as a result of self-initiated repair than as an outcome of otherinitiated repair. In a 1999 study, he reports modiﬁcations at a higher rate of 2.5 per minute in response to self-initiation than other-initiation (only 1 per minute). In his 2001 study, he found 224 negotiation moves signalling the need for repair versus 535 self-initiated attempts at repair. Furthermore, the other-initiated repair resulted in output modiﬁcation in 81 per cent of cases, whereas the self-initiated repair led to successful output modiﬁcation (that is, to a more accurate revised form) in 93 per cent of the cases.
Izumi (2003) attempted to conceptualize the pushed output hypothesis within the psycholinguistic framework developed for the L1 by Levelt (1989). Izumi argued that meaningful productive use of the L2 during speaking or writing calls for grammatical encoding and monitoring processes (p. 190). During production, these two processes allow learners to ‘assess the possibilities and limitations of what they can or cannot express in the [target language]’ and in doing so they become ‘an internal priming device for consciousness raising’ that can promote language learning (p. 191). However, given that the psycholinguistic processes of grammatical encoding and monitoring can only be summoned during natural language use, he stipulates that pushed output cannot be expected to be involved in mechanical language use, only in meaningful language use. This claim has been substantiated in a later study by Izumi and Izumi (2004).
Perhaps because different output researchers have pursued different lines of interest and expanded the pushed output hypothesis into diverse directions, the available ﬁndings are less compact than the interaction ﬁndings reviewed in previous sections. Some years ago Shehadeh (2002) made a call for more research on output modiﬁcation that directly looks at the link between output and acquisition. More recently, Toth (2006) noted that mounting evidence on ‘the links among metalinguistic knowledge, output, and the L2 implicit system’ (p. 373) is promising and warrants further research attention. To date, however, research on output appears to remain far from the goal of producing systematic accumulation of knowledge via a concerted research programme.

4.10	LEARNER-INITIATED NEGOTIATION  OF FORM	

Not only meaning, but also form can be negotiated. In these cases no communication difﬁculties are apparent, and instead it is a linguistic problem that attracts attention and results in language-mediated reﬂection during interaction. This focus on form is partly a natural consequence of formal instruction contexts. After all, students join language classes for the very concrete business of learning the L2. Excerpt (9) illustrates one such episode:

(9)	Student 1: He leaped. He freezed. Student 2: Freezed? Frozen?
Student 1: Freeze, froze, frozen. Froze. Student 2: He froze?
Student 1: F–R–O–Z–E. Froze. Student 2: Froze. OK.
(Jessica Williams, 1999, p. 601)

Excerpt (10) shows a more direct request for assistance from one learner to the other:
 

(10)	Learner 1: Los nombres en el mapa. ¿Es el mapa o la mapa?
[The names on the map. Is it the map masculine or the map-feminine?]
Learner 2: El mapa [The map-masculine]
(Gass et al., 2005, p. 587)
Negotiations of form often involve use of the L1 when they occur in classrooms where students share the same mother tongue, as is typically the case in foreign language settings and also in language immersion education programmes. For example:
(11)	Student 1: Et elle est tickelée. How do you say ‘tickled’? [And she is tickelée. How do you say ‘tickled’?] Student 2: Chatouillée.
[Tickled]
Student 1: OK. Chatouillée, chatouillée. How do you say ‘foot’? [Ok. Tickled, tickled. How do you say ‘foot’?]
Student 2: Le pied. [The foot]
Student 1: Ah, chatouillée les pieds. [Ah, tickled the feet]
(Swain and Lapkin, 2000, p. 259)
Such episodes need not lead to solutions that are always correct from the viewpoint of the target language, but the claim is that they engage meta-reﬂection and selfregulation processes that have the potential to foster L2 learning. Merrill Swain and her colleague Sharon Lapkin (1995) originally proposed the term LanguageRelated Episode (LRE) to refer to negotiation of form episodes that are learnerinitiated, and which they noted are particularly fostered during collaborative writing activities. Others have studied similar occurrences, although more frequently focusing on purely oral interactions, under different labels. For instance, Rod Ellis and his colleagues at the University of Auckland (Ellis et al., 2001) have used the term Learner-Initiated Focus on Form and Jessica Williams (1999) at the University of Illinois in Chicago has redeﬁned LREs as episodes containing negotiation of either form or meaning, as long as they are learner-initiated. However loosely called and deﬁned, the research shows that learner-initiated negotiation of form can take many shapes, running the full gamut from implicit to explicit focalization on the language code, as shown in (9), (10) and (11) above.
Interestingly, more explicit negotiation of form episodes that involve the use of the L1 or metalanguage appear to be particularly beneﬁcial for learning. Thus, Swain and Lapkin (2000) found that higher use of the L1 in LREs produced by French immersion eighth-graders during a jigsaw task was associated to higher-quality ratings on the collaborative narratives they subsequently wrote; and Basturkmen et al. (2002) reported that in the 165 learner-initiated and pre-emptive focus-on-form moves they studied, episodes were more likely to exhibit successful incorporation of the correct form when learners used some non-technical metalanguage (how do you spell X? is it a noun? this sentence past or present?) in them.
 

4.11	NEGATIVE FEEDBACK DURING MEANING AND FORM NEGOTIATION	
A ﬁnal beneﬁt of the environment, not discussed so far, is that it may provide learners with information about the ungrammaticality of their utterances. When the interlocutor has the actual intention to provide such negative information, then we may want to speak of error correction. However, more often than not, it is impossible (for the researcher as much as for the parties involved in the interaction!) to decide whether the intention to correct was at work. Therefore, we will prefer the term negative feedback over error correction or the nearsynonymous corrective feedback (both of which imply a clear pedagogical intention to correct) and also over negative evidence (which is used in formal linguistic discussions about what linguistic abstract information would be needed to reset certain values within the limits available in Universal Grammar; Beck et al., 1995). Negative feedback can be provided in interactive discourse orally, but it also occurs very often in writing (both in classrooms and in non-school contexts for professional, technical and creative writing) and in the context of technologymediated communication and study. For reasons of length, I will restrict the discussion in this section to oral negative feedback (I offer some suggestions for readings in the area of feedback on L2 writing and technology-mediated events at the end of the chapter). In Chapter 10, you will see how negative feedback can be conceptualized if we adopt a radically social perspective. Speciﬁcally, this has been done in distinct ways by SLA researchers guided by Vygotskian (section 10.6), conversation analytical (section 10.9) and systemic functional linguistic (section 10.12) perspectives.
From the perspective of cognitive-interactionist researchers, negative feedback may come about as part of negotiating meaning or form. For example, a clariﬁcation request (e.g. sorry?) is offered when intelligibility is low and meaning itself needs to be negotiated. Nevertheless, it may convey to the learner an indication, albeit a most implicit and indirect one, that some ungrammaticality is present:

(12)	Learner:	what happen for the boat? Interlocutor:	what?
Learner:	what’s wrong with the boat?
(McDonough, 2005, p. 86)

At the other extreme, explicit corrections overtly focus on the form at fault and occur when a teacher clearly indicates to a student that some choice is non-targetlike:

(13)	Student: Ich empfehle den Beruf an
[I recommend that profession + particle an]
Teacher: Nein nein, empfehlen empfehlen ohne an, ich empfehle den Beruf [No, no, to recommend without the preposition an: ‘I recommend that profession’]
(Lochtman, 2002, p. 276)
 

Somewhere in the middle are recasts and elicitations. Recasts occur when an interlocutor repeats the learner utterance, maintaining its meaning but offering a more conventional or mature rendition of the form. For example:

(14)	Greg:	Nagai aida o-hanashi shi-mashita kara, benkyoo shi-nakatta desu
[because I talked for a long time, I didn’t study] Interlocutor: Nagai aida o-hanashi shi-te i-ta kara desu ka?
[because you were talking for a long time?]
(Ishida, 2004, p. 375)

Elicitations include moves such as asking how do we say X? or directly asking the interlocutor to try again. When they occur in classrooms, the teacher may initiate an other-repetition and pause in the middle of the utterance at fault to let the student complete it correctly, as in (15):

(15)	Teacher:	Il vit où un animal domestique? Où est-ce que ça vit? [Where does a pet live? Where does it live?]
Student:	Dans un maison
[In a-masculine house]
Teacher:	Dans… ? Attention
[In… ? Careful]
Student:	Dans une maison
[In a-feminine house]
(Lyster, 2004, p. 405)

Elicitations like the one in (15) are didactic and are therefore typically issued by the teacher. They would be rarely issued by interlocutors outside the classroom context. Many language teachers and students believe the provision of negative feedback  by the teacher in speaking and writing is a staple of good classroom instruction. And, at least logically, negative feedback would be the single most relevant way for L2 learners to ﬁgure out what is not possible in the target language. Among SLA researchers, however, there are dissenting voices who object that language is fundamentally learned without recourse to negative feedback information (Schwartz, 1993). Others maintain there is insufﬁcient evidence to show conclusively that negative feedback works (Truscott, 1999). These sceptics discount the empirical evidence accumulated either because they feel it only reﬂects explicit, metalinguistic learning about the L2, or because they expect negative feedback should work across the board and universally in order to be pronounced useful, sometimes for both reasons. Most cognitive-interactionist researchers, on the other hand, argue that negative feedback is beneﬁcial for learning (Long, 1996; Lyster et al., 1999; Russell and Spada, 2006).
How frequent is oral negative feedback? In non-classroom settings, early studies suggested that direct negative feedback is rare (Gaskill, 1980; Day et al., 1984). In essence, the same conversational principles that apply in natural L1 conversations and make other-repair deeply dispreferred (Schegloff et al., 1977) are powerful deterrents of other-correction in L2 conversations. Nevertheless, corrections may still happen, as Schmidt and Frota (1986) amply documented in both their recorded conversational data and their retrospective diary data. Their account suggests that whether corrections occur outside the classroom depends on the relationship between an L2 speaker and her interlocutors, and even on interlocutor personalities and how inclined towards didacticism they may be around L2 speakers.
In instructional settings, a good proportion of errors appear to be responded to. In classrooms, the lowest attested end of the range is feedback on 48 per cent of errors, reported by Panova and Lyster (2002) for ten hours of ESL lessons in Montreal with a majority of students who shared L1 Haitian Creole and French. The highest end is 90 per cent (or one negative feedback episode every 0.65 minutes), reported by Lochtman (2002) for ten hours of German as a foreign language lessons in Belgium with three high-school classrooms of 15and 16-year-old speakers of Dutch as L1. In task-based dyadic interactions elicited in the laboratory with native-speaking interlocutors, somewhat lower rates of negative feedback are reported, probably because an instructional focus is not necessarily assumed by interlocutors. Between a half and a third of ungrammaticalities produced by learners appear to receive some kind of negative feedback in laboratory studies (e.g. Oliver, 1995; Iwashita, 2003; Mackey et al., 2003), but the proportion is sometimes lower (e.g. one-quarter of errors were responded to in Braidi, 2002).
How is negative feedback provided? Since the very beginnings of the ﬁeld, SLA researchers have tried to identify and tally negative feedback after classifying it into a number of discrete move types: clariﬁcation requests, explicit corrections, recasts, elicitations and several more (other-repetition, prompts, translations, etc.). For the L2 classroom, the most inﬂuential of these taxonomies was developed by Roy Lyster at McGill University and his colleague Leila Ranta at Concordia University (Lyster and Ranta, 1997). They built on a complex coding system proposed 20 years earlier by Craig Chaudron (1977) in his dissertation at the University of Toronto. Yet, the caution is increasingly more frequently voiced that each of these ‘types’ can differ greatly in implementation and that any one of them can vary in, among other things, the degree of explicitness or implicitness it entails, which in turn often varies, as we will see, as a function of context.
A sobering illustration is provided by the burgeoning research on recasts. This type of negative feedback, shown earlier in (14), has attracted an unprecedented interest since the publication about a decade ago of the ﬁrst classroom and laboratory recast studies, summarized in Table 4.1.
Spurred by the conﬂicting ﬁndings yielded in these and other studies, later discussions (e.g. Nicholas et al., 2001) have centred around the distinct nature of language classrooms and laboratories and the differences in implementation between rather implicit recasts, such as those documented by Lyster and Ranta (1997), and largely explicit recasts, such as those delivered quasi-experimentally by Doughty and Varela (1998). Indeed, even though recasts were proposed by Long (1996, 2006) to work precisely because they are reactive and implicit, and despite the fact that they are often considered to be potentially just a ‘conversational lubricant’ (Ellis and Sheen, 2006, p. 585), Nicholas et al. (2001) made the important point that they can largely vary in how implicit they really are. Conversely, Ellis et al. (2006) note that what Lyster (2004) calls prompts is a category that includes both explicit and implicit moves.
In the future, then, it would be more desirable to be able to classify and analyse negative feedback episodes by attributes or features that can cut across (and abstract out of) speciﬁc types. One of these features ought to be degree of explicitness, as proposed by Ellis and Sheen (2006; Sheen, 2006). Explicitness can be deﬁned as the perceptual salience (e.g. intonation) and linguistic marking (e.g. by metalanguage) with which the negative information is delivered and thus the corrective intent is made clear to learners. Another promising feature would be demand, which refers to main arguments for the beneﬁts of prompts put forth by Lyster (2004) and can be deﬁned as the degree of conversational urgency exerted upon interlocutors to react to the negative feedback in some way, for instance, by incorporating it, modifying their output or self-correcting. While explicitness and demand have received the most attention to date, a third promising feature is informativeness, deﬁned as how much information is provided about the blame of the ungrammaticality, for example, whether a model with the grammatical version of the utterance is included or withheld in a negative feedback event. We will see a very different attempt to categorize negative feedback episodes along a selfregulatory continuum in Chapter 10, section 10.6.
Just how effective has negative feedback proven to be? The accumulating evidence suggests that providing negative feedback in some form results in better post-test performance than ignoring errors (Russell and Spada, 2006). Much less agreement has been reached, however, with regard to when, how and why negative feedback works, when it does. In the last ten years, many studies have been designed to compare, descriptively or quasi-experimentally, different kinds of feedback. For example, a large number of studies have asked whether the learning potential of recasts is superior or inferior to negotiation for meaning (Oliver, 1995), models (Long et al., 1998; Iwashita, 2003; Leeman, 2003), prompts (Lyster and Ranta, 1997; Lyster, 1998, 2004; Ammar and Spada, 2006), or metalinguistic explanations (Ellis et al., 2006). Yet, the overall pattern of results indicates that when two or more implementations of negative feedback are compared, the more explicit one leads to larger gains, as observed by Suzanne Carroll and her Canadian colleagues in the early 1990s (see Carroll et al., 1992). This ﬁnding is hardly illuminating and comes as an extension of the same conclusion reached by Norris and Ortega (2000) in a meta-analysis of 49 instructional studies, featuring a range of instructional options that included grammar explanations, input manipulations, practice or output treatments and provision of various negative feedback regimes. At least as currently operationalized in treatments and measured in tests, explicit types of L2 instruction consistently result in more sizeable gains than implicit ones. The research also tells us increasingly more clearly and loudly that instructional context helps predict and understand not so much what negative feedback types teachers will prefer (since study after study shows teachers’ preferred strategy is recasts) but rather what degree of explicitness they will exert in their delivery of those types. Thus, in formal instructional settings that may be communicative but are not contentor meaning-based, negative feedback is delivered in a more explicit manner than in contexts where teacher and students are engaged in the business of learning content through the L2, such as immersion programmes (Sheen, 2004, 2006; Loewen and Philp, 2006). Moreover, within the same lesson, negative feedback may vary depending on the discourse and pedagogical context. Speciﬁcally, as Jessica Williams (1999) and Oliver and Mackey (2003) have shown for ESL classrooms with children and adults, respectively, more feedback is both provided and responded to in parts of a lesson that focus on language rather than content or management.
How students respond to teacher feedback on the ﬂy (that is, as evinced in the immediate next turn or turns) also differs remarkably across contexts, even in classrooms which at ﬁrst glance ﬁt a ‘same-context’ proﬁle. Lyster and Mori (2006) found this to be true for classes in two immersion contexts serving fourthand ﬁfth-graders, one (the same investigated by Lyster and Ranta, 1997, cf. Table 4.1) involving French in Quebec, a French-speaking province of Canada, and the other involving Japanese in the United States. The relative frequency of recasts and prompts was comparable in both contexts. However, in the French immersion programme, where an orientation to content and meaning making was prevalent and the second language was available outside the classroom, students repaired after prompts much more frequently than after recasts (53 per cent vs. 38 per cent). In the Japanese immersion programme, by way of contrast, the pattern was reversed. In this classroom culture, inserted in the climate of a foreign language setting, and where choral repetitions were a familiar script for students, students were less likely to repair after prompts (23 per cent) and much more likely to repair after recasts (68 per cent). To account for this asymmetry, Lyster and Mori proposed their Counterbalance Hypothesis. In a nutshell, they predict that in contexts that put a premium on meaning making and content, negative feedback may be more effective when the transient corrective episode is more overt and explicit, thus adding salience to the focus-on-form event against the overall communication-oriented culture of the classroom. Conversely, in contexts which put a premium on accuracy and the learning of language as an object, negative feedback may be more effective when it is implemented in a more implicit fashion that preserves and capitalizes on an unusual focus on meaning, making such episodes more salient against the overall form-oriented culture of the classroom.
In the end, as we have seen, the evidence suggests that any given type of negative feedback may vary widely in explicitness, and that ﬁndings will be different depending on the interplay between at least the explicitness with which feedback is implemented and the wider classroom and societal context in which negative feedback occurs. Given the importance of implementation of feedback types and wider curricular and social context, in the near future it will be necessary to reconceptualize the all-or-nothing comparative approach that has characterized L2 research on negative feedback to date.

4.12	THE LIMITS OF THE LINGUISTIC ENVIRONMENT	

It is beﬁtting to conclude our chapter on the environment by pausing to recognize voices that have warned all along that the ingredients of input, interaction, output and feedback are no magic bullet for L2 learning. Critiques offered all along by sociolinguistically and socioculturally minded researchers should help us temper our interpretations of cognitive-interactionist arguments about the beneﬁts afforded by experience with the linguistic environment.
First, it is important to remember that, besides negotiations in the imminent face of communication failure, other more positive features of interaction can provide learners with potential linguistic beneﬁts as well. Thus, Nakahama et al. (2001) showed that a conversational task engendered lower levels of negotiation than an information-gap task (a fact that is predicted by proponents of interaction, e.g. Pica et al., 1993), but that it also engendered more personal engagement and afforded many more opportunities to take risks, enabling these learners to produce longer turns and more complex language. Furthermore, Aston (1986) warned that interactional work is multifaceted and can accomplish things that have nothing to do with repairing communication problems. For instance, Foster and Ohta (2005) rightly note that not all other-repetitions are conﬁrmation checks and that many are what they call a continuer, or a repetition that indicates rapport and has the function to encourage the speaker to say more, as in the case of (16):

(16)	M1: I wasn’t so fat before I came to England V2: fat?
M3: yeah, but now I eat a lot of bread.
(Foster and Ohta, 2005, p. 421)

Second, the signiﬁcance of negotiation work for the interlocutors may be deceptive. Hawkins (1985) showed that learners may feign understanding in order to avoid lengthy and cumbersome negotiations, and they may do so motivated by the very human need to be polite and save face. In her study, responses to comprehension checks (e.g. uh-huh, or an echoic repetition) were on the surface appropriate. When the two L2 participants were asked, it turned out that in fact about half of their investigated responses were issued as a polite way out. They were ‘nothing more than repeating it because he [the interlocutor] was saying it’, as one of Hawkins’ participants put it (p. 173).
Furthermore, extremely low levels of negotiation may characterize some groups and settings, as discovered by Foster (1998) in a study with 21 part-time, intermediate-level English students in a college in the United Kingdom. In that classroom, and perhaps in many others, negotiation may be almost non-existent, perhaps once again out of politeness, or maybe disengagement. Alternatively, students may be engaged in the content being learned but produce minimal negotiation, presumably because comprehension problems do not arise and inaccuracies are forgiven, as both Musumeci (1996) and Pica (2002) have documented for college-level Italian and English content-based L2 instruction, respectively. In addition, negative and even confrontational interaction patterns can occur in learner–learner work as well, as shown in the work of Neomy Storch at the University of Melbourne (e.g. Storch, 2002). Conversely, a highly motivated partner may boost the other student’s willingness to interact and engage with a given oral task (e.g. Dörnyei and Kormos, 2000). In general, then, unfavourable attitudinal and affective predispositions can make one interlocutor or the other uninterested in negotiation or they can make negotiation moves that do occur fruitless for comprehension, much more so for acquisition.
 

It should be clear that not all things that can go wrong in interactions can be blamed on the non-native speaker and their level of interest, engagement, politeness, cooperativeness or willingness to learn. Ehrlich et al. (1989) found that not all people who happen to have grown up with a language are equally skillful at using it to deliver the kinds of explanations required from the tasks that researchers typically use in cognitive-interactionist studies. A particular style of L1 speaker, who they called embroiderers, engaged in confusing excess of information, causing less successful communication.
Power and prejudice are also unexamined factors in cognitive-interactionist work about the environment. Lindemann (2002) was able to show experimentally that some native speakers hold pre-existing negative attitudes against non-nativespeaking groups, and that these biased attitudes can affect the processes and outcomes of concrete interactions. In her study, attitudinally biased nativespeaking interlocutors approached learner utterances as problematic by default. Some of them therefore avoided negotiating at all, even when they showed willingness to negotiate actively on a similar task with another native-speaking interlocutor. Actual comprehension problems affected task outcomes (the drawing of a map route) only for those dyads where such negotiation avoidance was observed. Nevertheless, when asked, all prejudiced interlocutors evaluated task outcomes as a failure rather than a success, even when their routes had been accurately charted.
Finally, and related to issues of power, a neglected consideration is that many people who use an L2 may take what we may call an equitable responsibility approach to communication. As Schmidt (1983) astutely points out, sometimes ‘the nonnative may simply not accept the fairness of greatly disparate levels of effort by conversational partners’ (p. 167). According to Schmidt, Wes was one of them. He ‘expected native speakers to learn his interlanguage, … to consider it the native speaker’s problem as much as his own’ if mutual understanding was not achieved. More generally, and whatever language learning may come about as a result of interaction, interpersonal communication is never just about language, but it always involves interlocutors’ sense of self as well as power differentials, as we will be able to see in Chapter 10.
While all the caveats raised in this section should temper utopian or deterministic views about what the linguistic environment has to contribute to language learning, they do not invalidate the claims made by cognitiveinteractionists and documented across a large body of work reviewed in this chapter. Many of these insights have also been useful in the development of research on task-based language learning, an area that has continued to burgeon to this date (Ellis, 2003; Van den Branden, 2006; Samuda and Bygate, 2008). Nevertheless, the most important contribution (and the most important limitation) that we can remember as we leave this chapter is the realization that what matters in the linguistic environment is not simply ‘what’s out there’ physically or even socially surrounding learners, but rather what learners make of it, how they process (or not) the linguistic data and how they live and experience that environment. In Chapter 5, we will examine how learner cognition exerts a powerful inﬂuence on what gets processed (or not) in the linguistic data. In Chapter 10, we will explore how social structures and individual agency also shape lived experience in a dialectic of tension and, in the process, help explain the learning (or not learning) of additional languages.

