DEVELOPMENT OF LEARNER LANGUAGE


SLA scholars who investigate learner language seek to explain L2 competence and L2 development. Competence is deﬁned as the nature of the mental representations comprising the internal grammar of learners and development refers to the processes and mechanisms by which those representations and the ability to use them change over time. The focus is typically on grammar, and more narrowly on morphology and syntax. In order to understand what it means to become a competent user of an additional language, many other dimensions of the target language system must be learned, including vocabulary, phonology, pragmatics and discourse. However, thus far SLA efforts have been most persistent and most fruitful in the L2 areas of morphology and syntax. This will be our focus in this chapter, too. In the study of learner language there are two traditions: interlanguage studies and formal linguistic studies of L2 acquisition. Even though ultimately both share the same goal of understanding learner language, each has its own constructs, tenets and preferred methodologies. In this chapter, I will familiarize you with insights about learner language gleaned by the study of interlanguage from the general cognitive learning position and I will emphasize development over competence. Throughout the chapter, I will illustrate ﬁndings and arguments with oral and written discourse data. Whenever possible, I have drawn on a variety of attested examples from a number of target languages.
Before we delve into the wealth of knowledge about the development of learner language that the interlanguage research tradition has generated, let us brieﬂy consider the major differences between the approach we will explore in this chapter and the SLA tradition that investigates L2 acquisition from a formal linguistic perspective.

6.1	TWO APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF LEARNER LANGUAGE: GENERAL COGNITIVE AND FORMAL LINGUISTIC	

The awakenings of the ﬁrst tradition in the study of learner language can be situated in the coinage of the technical term interlanguage (Selinker, 1972), which refers to the language system that each learner constructs at any given point in development. The emergence of this construct was a watershed point that marked the beginnings of SLA as an autonomous ﬁeld, and it was inﬂuenced by ﬁndings that had begun to accumulate about child L1 acquisition (e.g. Roger Brown’s seminal 1973 study of three children acquiring English as a mother tongue). As we brieﬂy mentioned in Chapter 3, section 3.1, it initially represented a shift away from the older school of Contrastive Analysis. Researchers abandoned the contrastive cataloguing of linguistic differences favoured by that school and, instead, they began analysing the actual language samples that learners produced when they attempted to use their L2. The second tradition began thriving in the early 1980s, at another watershed point in the ﬁeld, when the school of Chomskyan linguistics ﬁnally made substantive inroads into SLA. As a result, researchers began to take seriously the possibility that an innate Universal Grammar (UG) would constrain L2 acquisition, as it was believed to constrain L1 acquisition. Since then, SLA researchers with training in formal linguistics have also pursued the study of the mental representations of grammar that learners build, with the aim to describe the universal and innate bounds of such knowledge (White, 2003).
The formalist approach is driven by two tenets that are often summarized by the characterization of domain-speciﬁc nativism. The tenet of nativism holds that humans as a species are biologically endowed with the basics of grammar knowledge prior to any experience with language. The tenet of domain-speciﬁcity or modularity posits that the human mind has a language-dedicated module (i.e. separate from other mind functions), where language learning and language use are handled. The approach emphasizes competence over development. It favours evidence about learner language gleaned via experimental elicitation, particularly the methodology of grammaticality judgements, where participants are asked to judge how grammatical or acceptable sentences are, in their estimation. This is because these researchers value evidence about learners’ tacit intuitions of language, especially when the intuitions speak to abstract UG phenomena that are unlikely to be known from exposure to L2 input alone, from knowledge of the L1 or from explicit instruction (Schwartz and Sprouse, 2000). From this formalist perspective, it is thought that grammaticality judgements and experimental data offer a better window into underlying linguistic competence than discourse data do. By contrast, interlanguage researchers believe that the same general cognitive learning mechanisms that help humans learn and process any other type of information help them extract regularities and rules from the linguistic data available in the surrounding environment. They draw on functional linguistic schools and language psychology, including information processing (cf. Chapter 5, section 5.1) and usage-based emergentism (cf. Chapter 5, section 5.16), and they emphasize development over competence. They also rely equally on experimental elicitation of evidence and on free production data. The latter type of data is valued because the evidence that learners generate when they speak, write or sign in an additional language offers a window into ability for use in real time and across communicative contexts, and such a focus is particularly useful when investigating development.
You should be aware that many of the ﬁndings and facts gleaned from interlanguage studies and discussed in this chapter have also been examined in the formal linguistic SLA tradition. However, because they are vested with specialized theoretical signiﬁcance that requires highly technical knowledge, they are beyond the scope of this book. If you are interested in the formalist lines of SLA work on learner language, you should consult the excellent specialized treatments offered by Hawkins (2001) and White (2003).

6.2	INTERLANGUAGES: MORE THAN THE SUM OF TARGET INPUT AND FIRST LANGUAGE	

Since the 1970s, close attention to the language that learners produce has enabled important insights about the nature of interlanguage. Consider the sentences in (1) and (2), the ﬁrst one produced orally by an L1 Japanese speaker (from my unpublished data archive) and the second one produced in an essay by a L1 Korean user of English (from Oshita, 2000, p. 313):

(1)	she … runned away
(2)	… he falls a piece of note into dough by mistake

In (1), the English simple past morpheme –ed has been applied to a verb that is irregular in the past (run, ran). In (2), a verb that is intransitive (fall) has been made into a causative verb with a transitive meaning (‘drop’). Both solutions are combined in (3), from an essay written by an L1 Spanish speaker (also from Oshita, 2000, p. 313):

(3)	It [a wall] was falled down in order to get a bigger green house

We may wonder what kinds of mental representation of English past tense and causative verbs these learners held when they produced the solutions in (1), (2) and (3). Most certainly, they did not pick them up from their surrounding input (e.g. textbooks or L1 English friends). Furthermore, nothing in Japanese, Korean or Spanish would necessarily explain these innovations. This illustrates two important generalizations about interlanguage: L2 learners end up building mental representations that are different from what the target input in their surrounding environment (be it the classroom or the wider society) looks like, and also different from the grammar representations available in their ﬁrst language.
Moreover, and this is a third generalization about interlanguage, many of the same developmental solutions are attested in the speech of young children who are learning their mother tongue (and who therefore do not have any L1 knowledge on which to rely, for good or bad!). For example, many children learning L1 English are seen to overregularize the past tense of irregular verbs (comed instead of came) at around two and a half to three years of age (Maratsos, 2000). Likewise, young children are fond of overextending causation to intransitive verbs in their early L1 production, as in example (4), reported by Sharwood Smith and Kellerman (1989,
p. 223), who credit it to child language acquisition researcher Melissa Bowerman:

(4)	I’m going to fall this on her
 
If interlanguage solutions are often shared by ﬁrst and second language acquirers, and if neither the target input nor the L1 inﬂuence can entirely explain them, then what can?

6.3	COGNITIVIST EXPLANATIONS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF LEARNER LANGUAGE	

In ﬁrst language acquisition, the idea that children are guided by universal Operating Principles in their processing of the input for learning was ﬁrst proposed by Slobin (1973), who offered a list of 40 statements that described what children seemed to ‘look for’ in the input data in order to learn the L1 grammar. These statements included maxims such as ‘Pay Attention to the End of Words’ (which helps explain why children learn sufﬁxes earlier than preﬁxes in words) and ‘Avoid Exceptions’ (which is consistent with many overregularization phenomena in L1 and L2 acquisition). In the 1980s, Roger Andersen applied Slobin’s framework to SLA with relative success. His One to One Principle (Andersen, 1984a), for example, has met with ample support in the L2 (see section 6.5). A similar effort at compiling psycholinguistic principles is Bill VanPatten’s (2002) Input Processing theory. He posited that (a) learners will process content words before anything else (a strategy we exploit naturally when we compose telegrams or read newspaper headlines); (b) they will also process lexical encodings before synonymous grammatical encodings (yesterday before –ed) as well as semantic or non-redundant encodings before formal or redundant ones (the pronoun he before the third person singular marking –s in he works here); and (c) they will interpret ﬁrst nouns in sentences as subjects (the eraser hits the cat, ‘eraser = doer’; see discussion in MacWhinney, 2001, pp. 75–6). From this view, the process of L2 acquisition is one of overcoming these psycholinguistic strategies and preferences and forging new ones that will work better in the L2. In the end, however, Operating Principles, Input Processing Strategies and other such inventories are excessively metaphorical in nature to take a research programme far enough into actual explanations.
A powerful family of cognitivist explanations for how L2 development works is provided by usage-based emergentist theories, which we introduced in Chapter 5 (section 5.16). These theories are far from uniﬁed. Robinson and Ellis (2008b), for example, list not only emergentism and dynamic systems theory but also cognitive linguistics, corpus linguistics, probabilistic and frequency-based theories, and connectionist and rational models of language. However, they all share some tenets. First, they hold that grammar learning is not rule-based or deductive, but driven by experience or inductive (Robinson and Ellis, 2008a). In addition, they take frequency and salience in the input, and cognitive processes of attention and categorization in the learner, as explanatory cornerstones of language learning (Ellis, 2006a, 2006b). Third, the contemporary cognitivist-emergentist perspectives afford variability an unprecedented importance, as variability is thought to be a major property of systems and a manifestation of development (Verspoor et al., 2008). Finally, they also hold that learner language development cannot be explained by recourse to isolated causes or back to a single force (Larsen-Freeman and Cameron, 2008). Instead, explanations must account for the simultaneous interaction of multiple forces. As we will see in section after section of this chapter, much evidence supports this contention and suggests that multiple factors simultaneously conspire to shape learner language and its development.

6.4	FORMULA-BASED LEARNING:  THE STUFF OF ACQUISITION	

It is clear that learners make ample use of memorized bits and pieces of language. These memorized formulas, which can be found in many learner transcripts, have been seen under different theoretical lights over the history of interlanguage studies. In the 1970s and 1980s, L2 users’ initial reliance on memorized formulas was thought to be spurred by communicative and strategic motives that happened to promote learning. This was Lily Wong Fillmore’s (1979) conclusion in her study of ﬁve Mexican children whose families had just emigrated to California for farm work. She recorded the children weekly over a year as they interacted in the playroom of their school and, in doing so, she documented their gradual transformation from no English at all to being relatively functional in their daily dealings with English-speaking peers. All ﬁve children were driven by social needs and adopted a general ‘speak now, learn later’ approach (p. 215). They soon began using memorized material which ‘was learnable and memorable by virtue of being embedded in current, interest-holding activities over which the learners had already acquired some mastery, and from which they had already received social rewards’ (p. 211). These bits and pieces of language were used in an unanalysed fashion at ﬁrst: Wait a minute, You know what?, Knock it off, It’s time to clean up, No fair!, Gotcha. Among the children, six-year-old Nora proved to be a ‘spectacular success as a language learner’ (p. 221) because she exhibited the fastest learning pace by far. Wong Fillmore discovered part of the reason was Nora’s formula-based analysis of the input, which she intently sought through abundant social interactions. Table 6.1 summarizes the attested history of Nora’s use of how do you do dese (‘how do you do this’) over the school year. As can be seen, the formula began to be combined with increasingly more varied slots and was successively analysed and broken down into grammar-like constituents. By the end of the study, how-questions had emerged in Nora’s interlanguage, even though they still ‘lacked the detailed reﬁnements which required further analysis’ (p. 215).
More contemporary usage-based theories of L2 learning posit that the process of formula-based analysis is not only a springboard to communication and grammatical analysis at beginning stages, but the stuff of acquisition, in that it guides the majority of the acquisitional task (N. Ellis, 2008). In this view, language acquisition proceeds bottom up, from formulas to low-scope patterns, to constructions, in an implicit and inductive process that is only peripherally intentional or strategic. Ellis (2002a, 2002b) explicates the process as follows. The ﬁrst step is the registration of formulas (also called items or exemplars), deﬁned as the pairing of a form and a meaning that is experienced in a particular language use event. As part of the processing of meaningful input, all experienced material is mandatorily tallied, and information about the frequencies, distributions and contexts of exemplars is implicitly encoded in memory upon each new encounter. Learners will encounter some items repeatedly and in contexts of meaning that are relevant to them; if the form–meaning pairings are frequent enough, and the formal and functional cues to how they work salient enough, they will extract information that cumulatively leads to generalizations from such experiences. In other words, repeated experience of the same formulas enables the abstracting of low-scope patterns, the second step of usage-based language learning. As Lieven and Tomasello (2008) explain with respect to L1 acquisition, low-scope patterns are often extracted around a single high-frequency word or chunk that is prototypical of the pattern, or an ‘island’ that helps learners get a quick ﬁx on some generalization at ﬁrst (e.g. Nora’s how do you do dese). Mechanisms of bootstrapping, or induction by categorization and generalization, enable the third step of gradual abstraction of the pattern into a construction or schema. As Lieven and Tomasello put it, ‘distributional analysis based on the relation between a form and (child-identiﬁed [or learner-identiﬁed]) functions, leads to linguistic representations developing internal structure’ and makes the inductive analysis progressively ‘less item-based and more schematic’ (p. 169).
It is important to note that L2 learners vary widely in their relative ability to make successful use of these processes. For example, we saw in Chapter 4 (section 4.1) that Wes was extremely adept at memorizing language and using it to great communicative effectiveness, but he never showed evidence of unpacking formulas (Schmidt, 1983). The same individual variation has been found in formal classroom learning. For example, in a study of wh-questions in French as a foreign language conducted in the United Kingdom, Myles et al. (1999) documented how 11-year-old school students diligently memorized the question comment t’appelles-tu? (‘what’s your name?’) from their teachers and materials. Many began using it as a chunk when asking questions about a third entity: Comment t’appelles-tu le garçon? (with the intended meaning ‘what’s the boy’s name?’). Gradually, other versions appeared in their oral production that suggested some analysis, for example, without the post-verbal clitic tu: Comment t’appelles la ﬁlle? (meaning ‘what’s the girl’s name?’). Finally, the third person form of the verb with its pre-verbal clitic also emerged: comment s’appelle le garçon? However, only ten of the 16 students they investigated underwent this full process of analysis. At the end of their ﬁrst two years of French in school, the remaining six had not gone far enough beyond the initial formula.
It would also be misguided to think that once formulas are analysed and give way to abstract constructions and schemata, they ‘disappear’ or dissolve themselves into this generalized knowledge. Instead, all levels of knowledge (formulas, low- scope patterns and constructions or schemata) ‘remain in the inventory … that speakers have created, to be drawn upon at various levels of abstraction’ (Lieven and Tomasello, 2008, p. 175). In fact, many language researchers are interested in describing the end result of such multi-layered repertoire of creative plus memorized language (e.g. Wray, 2002; Schmitt, 2004; Meunier and Granger, 2008). In addition, interesting efforts are beginning to be directed to support the L2 learning of formulas through instruction (Cortes, 2006; Fitzpatrick and Wray, 2006; Taguchi, 2007). These studies help us appreciate the central role that knowledge of formulas plays in the making of idiomatic and ﬂuent L1 and L2 speakers.

6.5	FOUR INTERLANGUAGE PROCESSES	

Aided by memory of formulas and experience-based induction of abstract generalizations, learners’ internal knowledge systems continually engage in processes of building, revising, expanding and reﬁning L2 representations, as the new grammar develops. Four important ways in which they do so are simpliﬁcation, overgeneralization, restructuring and U-shaped behaviour.
Simpliﬁcation reﬂects a process that is called upon when messages must be conveyed with little language. It is particularly pervasive at very early stages of L2 development and among naturalistic learners, as we will see in section 6.8. In later development too, simpliﬁcation may be seen in early representations of L2 morphology, when a one-meaning-one-form mapping is initially assumed by learners, as predicted by Andersen’s (1984a) One to One Principle. For example, Sugaya and Shirai (2007) found that even though the Japanese marker te i-ru can have a progressive meaning (Ken-ga utat-te i-ru, ‘Ken is singing’) and a resultative meaning (e.g. Booru-ga oti-te i-ru, ‘The ball has fallen’), L2 Japanese learners at ﬁrst use it to express progressive meaning only. Likewise, Andersen (1984b) found that Anthony, a 12-year-old L1 English learner of Spanish he investigated, used two invariant forms of the Spanish article – one devoted to mark deﬁniteness (la, ‘the’ in feminine singular form) and one to mark indeﬁniteness (un, ‘a’ in masculine singular form). This was despite the full choice of eight forms that are available in the Spanish target input.
Overgeneralization is the application of a form or rule not only to contexts where it applies, but also to other contexts where it does not apply. Overgeneralization has been particularly well documented with morphology. For example, learners begin using–ing from very early on, but they also overgeneralize it to many non-target- like contexts, sometimes for substantially long periods. Thus, Schmidt (1983, p. 147) reported that over three years Wes produced many instances of –ing that were appropriate in terms of meaning, as in (5), but also many instances of oversuppliance, as in (6):

(5)	I don’t know why people always talking me
(6)	so yesterday I didn’t painting

You will remember that Wes learned English naturalistically (see Chapter 4, section 4.1). In instructional contexts, too, classroom students have been seen to overgeneralize –ing frequently, even during the same period when they may not provide it in other required contexts, as in (7) and (8), produced by L1 Spanish learners of English as a foreign language and reported by Pica (1985, p. 143):

(7)	I like to studying English
(8)	I was study languages all last year

Overgeneralization can be apparently random, as in examples (6) through (7) above, or it can be systematic. An important case of systematic overgeneralization in morphology involves overregularization, or the attempt to make irregular forms ﬁt regular patterns. The overapplication of –ed to irregular verbs, shown earlier in illustrations (1) and (3), is a well-known case of overregularization, whose important theoretical consequences have been discussed by many researchers (e.g. see Clahsen, 2006, for L1; and Leung, 2006, for L2). Overgeneralization does not need to be interpreted negatively. Indeed, this process typically manifests itself after a certain level of development has been reached, in that it presupposes that learners have at least partially ﬁgured out some regularity. After systematically overgeneralizing, the learning task is to retreat from the overgeneralization and to adjust the application of the form or rule to increasingly more relevant contexts.
Restructuring is the process of self-reorganization of grammar knowledge representations. In their review of this concept for an SLA audience, McLaughlin and Heredia (1996) explained that restructuring covers a range of processes by which existing knowledge schemata may be quite radically modiﬁed, or a new organization may be imposed on already stored knowledge structures so as to accommodate smaller-scale knowledge changes that may have occurred previously. It is therefore assumed that restructuring involves knowledge changes that can be large or small, abrupt or gradual, but always qualitative and related to development or progress. However, the kind of progress that is implied in the notion of restructuring should not be equated with increased accuracy.
That progress does not always translate into accuracy is clear in the notion of U- shaped behaviour, which typically manifests itself as part of restructuring. The process is deﬁned by Sharwood Smith and Kellerman (1989) as ‘the appearance of correct, or nativelike, forms at an early stage of development which then undergo a process of attrition, only to be reestablished at a later stage’ (p. 220). That is, in U- shaped learning curves, the linguistic products of the ﬁnal phase cannot be distinguished from those of the ﬁrst phase, as both are seemingly error-free. However, the underlying representations at the two times are qualitatively different. In the ﬁrst phase, accuracy is purely coincidental, because it lacks the full representation of target-like functions and meanings that underlies the ﬁnal phase. We saw a case of U-shaped behaviour in Chapter 3 (section 3.6), when we discussed Kellerman’s research with three groups of Dutch L1 students of English. The group at the intermediate level of proﬁciency appeared to worsen in their intuitions about the L1–L2 meaning correspondences of breken/break. Another oft-cited L2 illustration of restructuring accompanied by U-shaped behaviour can be found in Huebner’s (1983) study of Ge, a naturalistic learner of English in his early twenties who also spoke Hmong as an L1 and Lao as an additional language. In fact, Ge’s learning of the English article the provides a good illustration of the interrelationship of all four interlanguage processes we have examined in this section.

6.6	INTERLANGUAGE PROCESSES AT WORK: GE’S DA	

Huebner (1983) described how Ge initially used the (or da, as he pronounced it) to mark nouns as speciﬁc and known to the hearer but not the current topic, to use a non-technical description. Notice, for example, how in (9) below no article is used when the referent is a speciﬁc entity known to the hearer and also the topic of the utterance. By contrast, in (10) da is used when the referent, although also speciﬁc and known to the hearer, is not the topic (‘we’ is) (both examples are taken from Huebner, 1979, p. 27):

(9)	chainis tertii-tertii fai. bat jaepanii isa twentii eit
[literally: Chinese thirty, thirty-five, but Japanese is twenty-eight] [The Chinese man is thirty-five, but the Japanese is twenty-eight]
(10)	gow howm, isa plei da gerl [literally: go home, is play the girl]
[When we went home, we would visit with the girls]

Ge’s initial analysis of the functions of da was felicitous because it resulted in high levels of accuracy, since a large proportion of nouns are used with the in English precisely when they are speciﬁc and known to the hearer (e.g. The book that you lent me is great). A month and a half into the study, Ge suddenly began using da to mark between 80 and 90 per cent of all noun contexts he produced, mostly where the referent was speciﬁc, regardless of assumed hearer knowledge. This level of overgeneralization was so pervasive that Huebner used the term ﬂooding to describe it. At this point, Ge’s system may have been exploring the range of contexts that apply to the, a necessary step on the way to restructuring da from an information status marker (which signals known or new and topical or non-topical information) to the more encompassing grammatical category of ‘article’ (which in English signals referentiality, a combined property of speciﬁcity and hearer knowledge, but not topicality). While this was great progress in the building of an internal grammar of English, it of course resulted in much lower levels of accuracy than before. However, a little over ﬁve months into the study, oversuppliance of da disappeared from ﬁrst-mention contexts (which are ‘unknown to hearer’ albeit speciﬁc and require the indeﬁnite article a, as in a woman is walking down the street) and shortly before reaching month seven of the study, da began to retreat from other non-target-like indeﬁnite contexts, giving way to a restructured rule that yielded stable target-like suppliance of da at 80 to 90 per cent levels for the rest of the observation period.
Ge’s case shows that interlanguage development is not haphazard but instead changes in predictable, systematic ways (a matter of development). At the same time, and just as all natural languages are, so is interlanguage simultaneously characterized by systematicity and variability. In other words, albeit systematic, interlanguage change is always non-linear (a matter of accuracy) and unevenly paced (a matter of rate). The next six sections of the chapter are devoted to an examination of seminal interlanguage ﬁndings that attest to the complex relationship among development, accuracy and rate of learning.

6.7	DEVELOPMENT AS VARIABILITY-IN-SYSTEMATICITY: THE CASE OF JORGE’S NEGATION	

In the SLA literature, the study of English negation offers a good example of systematic, non-linear and unevenly paced development along predictable stages. I will illustrate the stages here with longitudinal data from Jorge, a young English L2 user investigated by Cancino et al. (1978) and also by Stauble (1978). The ten- month developmental pathway towards his acquisition of English negation is depicted in Table 6.2.
Jorge was born in Bogotá, Colombia, in an upper-middle-class family. At the age of 12, he and his family moved to Boston, where he attended regular school. He had had only three months of private tutoring in English prior to his arrival in Boston and subsequently received only minimal ESL instruction in his school, where he attended regular classes and studied regular school subject matters in English. He spoke Spanish at home and English in school. Over ten months, his knowledge of negation went along a process that involved the restructuring of his representation of negation in English from pre-verbal to post-verbal position (stage 3 in Table 6.2). As we mentioned in Chapter 3 (section 3.4), pre-verbal negation is the ﬁrst stage regardless of the learners’ L1 background, although speakers of L1s where pre- verbal negation is the grammatical norm may remain in the ﬁrst stage in English longer than speakers whose L1s require post-verbal negation. (Incidentally, Jorge’s L1 is a pre-verbal negation language, but it only took him three or four months to restructure into post-verbal negation in L2 English.) Hyltenstam (1987) suggests that the ﬁrst pre-verbal stage may be motivated by some typological basic inﬂuence, since across languages of the world pre-verbal negation is a more common grammar conﬁguration than post-verbal negation.
Jorge’s traversing of the four stages was unevenly paced. The early stages were brief and lasted only one or two months each, whereas the rest of the development was much slower and lasted six months. Restructuring into post-verbal negation (at stage 3) was also gradual, ﬁrst applied to restricted contexts only (after copula and auxiliary verbs) and only later (at stage 4, in month ﬁve or six) to the remaining relevant contexts. This kind of gradual application of a rule that spreads from a subset of simpler contexts to increasingly more relevant and complex contexts is often seen in interlanguage development (e.g. in the development of tense and aspect; see section 6.10 and Table 6.6).
Moreover, Jorge’s development of negation did not proceed linearly from error- full to error-less solutions. Instead, and as shown in Table 6.2, only the ﬁnal fourth stage is target-like. Nevertheless, each new stage reﬂects a more advanced solution to the developmental problem of negation. Thus, I didn’t went to Costa Rica is a better, more advanced ‘error’ than I will don’t see you tomorrow, which in turn is a better and more advanced non-target-like interlanguage innovation than I don’t saw you. We must note here, then, that not all ‘errors’ are equal, and that interlanguage solutions which may look like ‘errors’ can nevertheless be good news. Finally, it is worth pointing out that Jorge’s development also involved overgeneralization (see section 6.5) of a given form as the preferred negation functor. Initially, this was no but it soon became don’t (at stage 2, three months into the study). Towards the middle of the study, his knowledge representation of don’t also underwent analysis from a memorized formula to a construction that carries not only negation but also tense (as evinced in Jorge’s attested utterance I didn’t went to Costa Rica) and person (i.e. doesn’t).
Jorge was lucky enough to reach the last stage of negation after ten months of immersion in the L2 environment. However, neither eventual attainment of the highest stage in a given developmental sequence nor convergence with the target grammar or even ultimate high levels of accurate use is a necessary outcome of L2 development. This is particularly true of naturalistic adult learners, as we will see in the next section.

6.8	INTERLANGUAGE BEFORE GRAMMATICALIZATION: THE BASIC VARIETY OF NATURALISTIC LEARNERS	

We know much about the acquisition of an L2 when learners begin from zero L2 knowledge and without the aid of instruction, that is, when interlanguage development must proceed solely under naturalistic circumstances. A main contribution to this knowledge comes from a large-scale investigation conducted in the 1980s under the auspices of the European Science Foundation (ESF) and led by Wolfgang Klein and Clive Perdue (Perdue, 1982; Klein and Perdue, 1997). The ESF project had two remarkable strengths: it was longitudinal and also crosslinguistic. Forty adults who were immigrants in ﬁve different European countries were studied over two and a half years, as they acquired one of ﬁve L2s: Dutch, English, French, German and Swedish. The resulting data amounted to a dense and longitudinal corpus of 15,000 pages of L2 oral transcriptions, spanning 30 months of study (Klein and Perdue, 1997). The combinations of L1 and L2 investigated were determined in part by the political realities of immigration in European countries at the time, which explains the narrow range of L2s included. This was more than compensated, however, by the purposeful ‘two L2s by two L1s’ design, shown in Figure 6.1. You can see how the crosslinguistic insights about interlanguage development yielded by such a design can be deep. In the end, however, the ESF study uncovered strong universal patterns rather than large crosslinguistic particularities.


Over the two and a half years, all learners in the project showed evidence of developing a rudimentary but systematic and fully communicative interlanguage system that was called the Basic Variety by Klein and Perdue (1997). Its main characteristics are summarized in Table 6.3. In a nutshell, the Basic Variety can be described by recourse to a few simple principles for how utterances must be structured (i.e. phrasal constraints) and how constituents must be ordered and information organized along pragmatic and lexical resources (i.e. semantic and pragmatic constraints). The Basic Variety shows no evidence of grammaticalization of resources, that is, it makes little use of morphology or subordination. A good case in point is the expression of temporality, which in the absence of morphology needs to rely on pragmatic and lexical resources, as summarized in Table 6.3 (see also Table 6.5).
We may wonder what, if anything, may make naturalistic learners move beyond the Basic Variety, that is, beyond the reliance on pragmatic and lexical principles and towards the grammaticalization of language resources. Klein and Perdue (1997) posited that it may be the increasingly more pressing need to express complex thoughts and the challenge of putting ideas into words when the concepts involve conﬂicting semantic and pragmatic conditions. This meaning-making pressure apparently worked for two-thirds of the 40 naturalistic learners investigated in the ESF project. However, it did not seem to be enough for the remaining third, who were seen to reach a plateau after a year and a half, sometimes earlier, and had not progressed beyond the Basic Variety by month 30, at the conclusion of the study.

6.9	PATTERNED ATTAINMENT OF MORPHOLOGICAL ACCURACY: THE CASE OF L2 ENGLISH MORPHEMES	

The results of the ESF project clearly show that not all L2 users will go beyond pragmatic and lexical resources. However, many (both naturalistic and instructed) will indeed do so. For them, morphology, particularly inﬂectional morphology associated with verbs and nouns, will deploy slowly and non-linearly, but surely. One of the earliest SLA discoveries, made in the 1970s, is that a set of English inﬂectional morphemes is mastered by L2 English users in a certain order, which is shown in Table 6.4. This order represents the point at which learners across studies reached a conventional level of accurate suppliance of these forms, usually set at 80 or 90 per cent, depending on the particular researcher. The original evidence is nicely reviewed in depth by Heidi Dulay, Marina Burt and Stephen Krashen (1982, chapter 8), the researchers who conducted the initial studies, and more recently by Goldschneider and DeKeyser (2001). The accuracy order has been shown to be relatively similar for both young and adult L2 learners, for both naturalistic and instructed learners, and regardless of L1 background or whether the data are collected orally or via writing.
Three qualiﬁcations are in order. Obviously, in paper and pencil grammar tests, instructed learners may be able to supply all morphemes with relative accuracy, but that would not show their ability for real-time use of the L2, only their capacity to study language rules. In addition, as is true of all interlanguage systematicity, this patterned attainment of accuracy should not be equated with linear progression from inaccurate to accurate use of the L2 in a form-by-form, piecemeal fashion. Before reaching the 80 or 90 per cent accuracy benchmark for any of these morphemes, L2 users undergo non-linear increases and decreases in accuracy (remember, for instance, Ge’s development of da/the in section 6.6), and some of them may never progress all the way to full target-like morphological accuracy when they speak, write or sign.
The third qualiﬁcation is that, on occasion, some studies have reported slightly different ranks for structures within a given box in Table 6.4. For example, in a ﬁve- year longitudinal study, Jia and Fuse (2007) reported that ten Mandarin-speaking participants who had arrived in the United States between the ages of ﬁve and 16 found past tense –ed more challenging than third person –s (possessive –’s was not investigated). Three among the youngest starters were seen to master third person
–s to 80 per cent accuracy after a year and a half or later in the United States, but none of the ten participants had yet mastered –ed at the end of the ﬁve-year study period. (Incidentally, these ﬁndings give you a clear sense for just how very slow L2 development can be!) However, the rank of structures is never violated across the boxes in Table 6.4.
In a meta-analysis of 12 previous studies, Goldschneider and DeKeyser (2001) devised ﬁve ways of operationalizing frequency and salience and showed that each operationalization on its own predicted the pooled results across studies reasonably well (in the range of 16 per cent to 36 per cent shared variance), and that when combined they could explain a great amount (71 per cent) of the variance in the data (for some help with how to interpret shared variance, see Chapter 7, section 7.1). These ﬁndings support the usage-based contention that input frequency and input salience can go a long way in predicting how difﬁcult it is for learners to acquire certain aspects of the L2 grammar (Robinson and Ellis, 2008b).
 

6.10	MORE ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF L2 MORPHOLOGY: CONCEPT-DRIVEN EMERGENCE OF TENSE AND ASPECT	

The development of L2 morphology has also been studied from a functional perspective that is known as the concept-oriented approach to language development. This approach places meaning making at the heart of language acquisition and posits that ‘an L2 system can more adequately be described if the content to be expressed is taken as the starting point of the analysis’ (von Stutterheim, 1991, p. 141). The expression of temporality has been well studied from this perspective.
There is consensus that learners of a second language (as well as children learning their ﬁrst language) undergo three broad phases, each characterized by reliance on a different set of resources that help them express temporality: pragmatic means, lexical means and morphological means (see review in Bardovi- Harlig, 2000). The three phases are represented schematically in Table 6.5. In the ﬁrst phase, pragmatic devices are used exclusively. For example, learners narrate in the natural chronological order of events (von Stutterheim and Klein, 1987) and they recruit the help of interlocutors in order to ﬁll in temporal reference during interaction (Sato, 1990). In the second phase, lexical devices are added; for example, a range of adverbial expressions of time is used (see illustrations for the Basic Variety in Table 6.3). In this section, we examine development that happens during the third phase, at the point when temporality begins to be expressed via grammatical resources, that is, by means of verbal morphology.


 

It is known that, when morphology emerges in interlanguage to express grammatical tense and aspect, not all forms emerge at once. Moreover, only one function or meaning is expressed by a given form initially, as posited by Andersen (1984a) in the One to One Principle (see also our discussion of simpliﬁcation in section 6.5). It is also known that some form–meaning pairings are more basic or earlier acquired than others. For example, in English, L2 users learn to use the present and past contrasts in the following progression: present progressive > simple past > past progressive > present perfect > past perfect (Bardovi-Harlig, 2000). Finally, it is a well-established fact that the patterned development of tense and aspect during the phase of morphological deployment is guided by the inherent aspect or lexical semantics of each verb to which morphology is attached. This is the prediction, in a nutshell, of the Aspect Hypothesis formulated by Andersen and Shirai (1996). More speciﬁcally, the Aspect Hypothesis predicts that the developmental pathway of emergence of tense and aspect will reﬂect prototypical pairings, that is, combinations where the semantics of the verb morphology is congruent with the semantics of the meaning of the verb to which the morphology is attached.
To illustrate, in L2 English the ﬁrst functionally appropriate uses of the imperfective marking –ing, which carries a prototypical durative meaning, emerge in interlanguage in combination with verbs depicting events that imply duration, such as run, walk, sing or watch (such verbal meanings are called ‘activities’ in linguistic theories of tense and aspect). Conversely, the English simple past tense carries a prototypical punctual meaning, and it begins to be used appropriately ﬁrst in combination with verbs that imply an action with a beginning and end, such as meet someone, catch something, see someone/something, recognize, ﬁnd or bump into (called ‘achievements’). Achievements and also verbal contexts denoting actions with an outcome, such as paint a picture or steal a bread (called ‘accomplishments’) also tend to invite new morphology involving perfective markers (have/had+participle). Gradually, tense and aspect markers will pair with non-prototypical verbal meanings, as well. For example, –ing will spread to mark non-prototypical situations where the inherent meaning of the verb phrase is an ‘accomplishment’ but the action is viewed from a durative perspective (e.g. I can’t believe she is stealing some bread).
A good number of L2 studies across different languages has lent support to the predictions of the Aspect Hypothesis. Table 6.6 summarizes the attested emergence of perfective and imperfective aspect in L2 Spanish, which is expressed by the morphology of pretérito and imperfecto. As can be seen, development unfolds in a gradual form–function mapping process that is guided by prototypical pairings of verbal morphology with verb semantics. As Roger Andersen (1993) acknowledged, it is unclear whether this semantically constrained emergence of tense and aspect morphology is a case of the frequency in the input shaping acquisition (assuming that prototypical pairings are more frequent in the input than non-prototypical ones, something that awaits empirical conﬁrmation with sufﬁciently large L1 corpora), or a case of the human perceptual and conceptual architecture shaping both how we use language and how we acquire it. Usage-based SLA researchers (for example, most of the authors in Robinson and Ellis, 2008a) would say it is probably both.
 

Stages of development that are similar to those depicted in Table 6.6 have been found for other L2s that have the perfective–imperfective distinction as well (e.g. French passé composé and imparfait; Italian passato prossimo and imperfetto; see review in Bardovi-Harlig, 2000). Although the tense and aspect systems of other languages may be rather different, they too have been found to exhibit similar prototype inﬂuences (see Sugaya and Shirai, 2007, for L2 Japanese; and Lee and Kim, 2007, for L2 Korean). That these principles of form–function mapping should be relevant across such a range of L2s attests to the centrality of meaning and the pervasiveness of systematicity in interlanguage development.

6.11	DEVELOPMENT OF SYNTAX: MARKEDNESS AND THE ACQUISITION OF L2 RELATIVIZATION	

SLA researchers have uncovered developmental systematicity not only in many areas of morphology but also with respect to various domains of syntax. The concept of markedness, discussed in Chapter 3 (see section 3.5) in connection with phonology, has also been applied with remarkable success to the description of how L2 learners will acquire one area of syntax in the target language: relative clauses.
Ever since the ﬁrst pioneering studies by Schachter (1974; see section 3.7) and later Eckman et al. (1988), this proliﬁc line of work has drawn on Keenan and Comrie’s (1977) proposal of a Noun Phrase Accessibility Hierarchy that describes relativization options across all human languages. The hierarchy is illustrated with L2 data in Table 6.7. At the highest position of the hierarchy (that is to say, the most frequent and least marked) are subject relative clauses; at the lowest (i.e. the least frequent and most marked) are object of comparison relative clauses. Crosslinguistically, these six possible types of relative clause are in a markedness relationship which is hierarchical and implicational. That is, each lower (more marked) type is seen to be possible in a given language only if all other preceding (less marked) types are also possible. No matter how few or how many possibilities for relativization a given language allows, it will do so following the pattern from highest to lowest in the hierarchy, without gaps.
The same implicationally related markedness hierarchy has been observed within learner grammars in studies that have examined not only L2 English (e.g. Pavesi, 1986) but other target languages as varied as Chinese (Hu and Liu, 2007), German (Byrnes and Sinicrope, 2008), Swedish (Hyltenstam, 1984) and several other L2s (Tarallo and Myhill, 1983; Shirai and Ozeki, 2007). The evidence is particularly robust for subject, direct object and object of preposition types, whereas evidence on the other three types is more scarce and difﬁcult to interpret (see Tarallo and Myhill, 1983, for discussion). Speciﬁcally, when a given learner is able to produce more marked types (particularly the in English conspicuous object of preposition), she or he will also likely be able to produce the highest (least marked) positions of subject and direct object, and not the other way around. The L2 ﬁndings are largely in accord with the facts reported for the development of relativization in L1 acquisition (Diessel and Tomasello, 2005).
In fact, both L2 and L1 ﬁndings about relativization concur not only for acquisitional patterns but also for patterns regarding use and processing (e.g. Fox and Thompson, 2007; Reali and Christiansen, 2007). Thus, as in L1 production, in L2 production the types in the higher positions of the hierarchy are more frequent, and the types in the lower, more marked positions tend to exhibit less accuracy and attract more non-target-like solutions, such as resumptive pronouns in L2 English (The teacher who you introduced me to her works for me now) (see Hu and Liu, 2007, and Hyltenstam, 1984, for more discussion). As Reali and Christiansen (2007) note, the explanations for these universal patterns in L1 and L2 relativization phenomena are likely to be related to a number of syntactic, semantic-discoursal, cognitive and statistical inﬂuences.

6.12	A LAST EXAMPLE OF SYSTEMATICITY: CUMULATIVE SEQUENCES OF WORD ORDER	

Let us ﬁnish this overview of ﬁndings about interlanguage systematicity with an examination of a large-scale study conducted by Jürgen Meisel, Harald Clahsen and Manfred Pienemann in the late 1970s, known as the ZISA project (the acronym for Zweitspracherwerb Italienischer, Portugiesischer und Spanischer Arbeiter or ‘The Second Language Acquisition of Italian, Portuguese and Spanish Workers’; see Meisel et al., 1981). The project culminated with the discovery of a developmental pattern for the emergence of word order in German L2 among 45 informants, all migrant workers from Romance language backgrounds living in Germany. The pattern consists of ﬁve stages, summarized in Table 6.8. At the time, two processing strategies were hypothesized by Meisel et al. to be relevant in order to explain the ﬁndings: a canonical word order strategy (COS) and an initialization/ﬁnalization strategy (IFS). The strategy of COS posited that producing subject–verb–object word order is easier than other word orders. The strategy of IFS was predicted on the assumption that initial and ﬁnal edges of strings are perceptually more salient to learners and therefore moving material to the initial or ﬁnal position of a syntactic string is easier than moving material from or to positions inside the same string.
In order to appreciate the observed stages illustrated in Table 6.8, it is important to stress that the ﬁndings are based on emergence, or the ﬁrst productive use of a given word order. The benchmark of emergence indicates what level of processing (operationalized as COS and IFS) a learner is capable of handling – even if only part of the time – in spontaneous production. In addition, the developmental stages in Table 6.8 are implicationally constrained in an upward direction, meaning that learners tend to traverse this developmental progression without skipping stages. This implicational systematicity is unlike the systematicity discovered for the negation stages (see section 6.7 and Table 6.2), which learners also traverse without skipping. With negation, each lower stage is gradually ‘outgrown’ and eventually abandoned (in the case of learners who converge towards the target language). By contrast, the word order development is cumulative, as each attained stage adds another possibility to the full repertoire of German word order.
All stages of German word order are grammatical, with the only exception of stage 2, which, while more advanced than stage 1, happens to result in an ungrammatical solution. This is because, in German, placing an element other than the subject in the beginning of a sentence (see Table 6.8, ‘then + the girl comes’) triggers inversion of the subject–verb sequence: dann kommt das Mädchen, ‘then comes the girl’ (German is a V2 language, where the verb in a main clause always needs to take the second position). Only after separation has emerged at stage 3 are learners ﬁnally able to cope with movement inside the string and hence with the subject–verb inversion rule, thus producing at least some adverb-initial sentences that are grammatical in German. Remember, however, that these developmental sequences are about emergence and not accuracy. Therefore, a learner could apply the inversion rule to only one or two relevant cases and miss its application to another ten cases, which therefore are cases of stage 2 ungrammatical adverb preposing without inversion, and we would still consider her to be at stage 4, not 2 (some researchers use a conventional safety minimum of three successful applications out of at least four attempted cases). The non-target-like stage 2 may or may not eventually fade away from learners’ interlanguage, depending on how accurate they become, but all other stages are cumulative, as already noted.
The same rationale for the initial developmental sequences uncovered for German L2 word order was later applied by Manfred Pienemann and colleagues in Australia to explain the developmental order of emergence of word order in English questions (Pienemann et al., 1988), which was brieﬂy introduced in Chapter 3 (section 3.4). Table 6.9 summarizes and illustrates the stages. Once again, one stage typically results in ungrammatical solutions (stage 3) and thus may be phased away (in the case of learners who become accurate), but all other stages result in grammatical solutions and are cumulatively added to the repertoire of how to ask questions in English.
In the late 1990s, Pienemann’s thinking evolved into a processing-sensitive but largely linguistic framework that he called Processability theory (Pienemann, 1998). In a nutshell, he proposed that in the beginning L2 learners are limited in their capacity for what syntactic information they can hold in memory during processing (hence the term ‘processability’ in the name of the theory). They need to gradually develop the psycholinguistic capacity to match grammatical information contained within and across units in the linguistic material they encounter, and they are capable to do so gradually with more distant elements in linguistic units. This matching presents a hierarchical and increasingly more difﬁcult processing problem: within categories (e.g. walk + ed = pastness), then noun phrases (e.g. two girl + s = plural agreement), then verb phrases (e.g. John walk + s = person agreement), then sentences (e.g. it is raining / is it raining? = question inversion) and ﬁnally subordinate clauses (e.g. he will come / he said he would come = reported speech). Remarkably, the current formulation of Processability theory has offered explanations for a variety of word order phenomena across several target languages, including morphosyntactic aspects of typologically distant languages such as Arabic, Chinese and Japanese (Pienemann, 2005).

6.13	FOSSILIZATION, OR WHEN L2 DEVELOPMENT COMES TO A STOP (BUT DOES IT?)	

There is no guarantee that all learners will converge with the target grammar system along the pathways we have described in the preceding six sections. Much to the contrary, many L2 users may continue developing without aligning with the target representations, while many may stop along the way, perhaps permanently. The term fossilization was coined by Selinker (1972) and is used to characterize cases of ‘permanent lack of mastery of a target language (TL) despite continuous exposure to the TL input, adequate motivation to improve, and sufﬁcient opportunity for practice’ (Han, 2004, p. 4). There are several well-studied cases of adult learners whose development appears to ﬁt the fossilization diagnosis, at least at ﬁrst blush.
One is Alberto, the 33-year-old immigrant worker from Costa Rica whose naturalistic acquisition of English was studied by Schumann (1976; see Chapter 4, section 4.2). He appeared to be unable to move beyond basic English. After ten months in Boston, Schumann noted that, in terms of morpheme accuracy (cf. Table 6.4), his suppliance of –ing and copula was relatively accurate but below conventional mastery levels of 80 per cent while his suppliance of –ed was virtually zero. In terms of questions (cf. Table 6.9), he only produced uninverted ones and thus remained at stage 3. With regard to negation (cf. Table 6.2), he remained at the pre-verbal ﬁrst stage for the entire ten months of the study. Hoping he could destabilize what seemed to be an unusual lack of growth, Schumann delivered an intensive regime of one-on-one instruction about English negation to Alberto over seven additional months. This was to no avail. After 17 months in the L2 environment, of which seven months also included instruction, Schumann reports that Alberto remained in the pre-verbal stage of negation, at 20 per cent overall accuracy in this area, the same level he had exhibited before instruction.
Not all learners who allegedly fossilize are naturalistic, and not all fossilization occurs at only incipient levels of development. The study of Patty by Lardiere (2007) is a well-known case of an instructed learner who achieved a very high level of competence in the L2 but nevertheless seems to have ceased developing in one speciﬁc area of the L2: bound verbal morphology, particularly –ed and third person singular –s (cf. Table 6.4). Patty, an L1 speaker of Hokkien and Mandarin, moved to the United States at age 22 and was 31 years old when Lardiere ﬁrst interviewed her, nine years after that move. About nine years later, at age 40, she was interviewed again, and once again two months later. Over two decades of being surrounded by English in graduate school and later in her workplace, Patty developed advanced English abilities, including rather high levels of accurate article usage (84 per cent accuracy for the and 75.5 per cent for a), despite this being an area of great difﬁculty for many L2 users from no-article language backgrounds (as Mandarin and Hokkien are). But in interview data after a decade, and later, two decades, of residence in the L2 environment, Patty continued to supply two of the morphemes that are typically mastered last (cf. Table 6.4) at extremely low rates: about 35 per cent for regular past –ed and about ﬁve per cent for third person singular –s.
Fossilization, particularly among very advanced learners, does not always need to involve basic syntax or morphology, but can also affect subtle areas where syntax and semantics interface. This was shown in a seven-year study by Han (2000, 2006) of Geng and Fong, two male adults from Chinese L1 backgrounds who were otherwise extremely advanced users and had enjoyed optimal learning circumstances. Geng and Fong had had formal English instruction for six years in their country, China, and had scored over 600 on the TOEFL before they moved to the United Kingdom to obtain their doctoral degrees. Upon receipt of their degrees, each continued living in English-speaking environments, and both actively published in English in international journals in their ﬁelds. In her analyses of grammaticality judgements as well as free writing over the seven-year span, Han found that both Geng and Fong consistently failed to supply passive in some cases where English requires it, as illustrated in (11), and they oversupplied it in other contexts where the active voice would be pragmatically and discoursally preferred in English, as shown in (12):

(11)	I do not know whether these problems have solved in the newest release
(written by Fong in 1996; Han, 2000, p. 89)
(12)	What I can do for you is to give you a list of professors … The list will be sent to you later
(written by Fong in 1996; Han, 2000, p. 94)

In addition, both L2 users showed indeterminacy in their knowledge of English unaccusativity, or the use of certain verbs in the active voice with a quasi-passive meaning (e.g. These doors will close at midnight). Speciﬁcally, on occasion Geng and Fong ungrammatically overgeneralized the passive voice by applying it to verbs with unaccusative meanings, as illustrated in (13), while other times they used unaccusatives grammatically, as shown in (14):

(13)	Thanks to John’s blocking the event were stopped after 3/7/03
(written by Geng in 2003; Han, 2006, p. 69)
(14)	The action already stopped on 1/6 probably after receiving our mail
(written by Geng in 2003; Han, 2006, p. 69)

The persistence of both the non-native-like and native-like solutions over the seven years is indeed suggestive of likely permanent cessation of learning in this one area of the L2.
In the end, the notion of fossilization, while strongly intuitive, has proved to be extremely problematic to pin down. Three are the most serious caveats raised by the experts (see reviews in Long, 2003; Han, 2004). One, complete and permanent cessation of learning cannot be conclusively demonstrated unless learners are followed over their lifetime, or at least over a very long period of time. Two, the studies rarely document in depth whether the so-called fossilized learners enjoyed truly optimal learning conditions, including: (a) sufﬁciently rich opportunities for exposure and practice; (b) positive attitudes towards the target language and society; and (c) the aid of (high-quality) instruction. Three, even if it could be demonstrated that fossilization exists, the reasons behind it have resisted any consensus thus far. For example, Schumann offered negative attitudes towards the target language and culture as the culprit (see Chapter 4, section 4.2); Han, Lardiere, and also Sorace (1993), proposed that fossilization is caused by a subtle ceiling that the L1 imposes on L2 development for even the most advanced learners; Long (2003), reviewing a variety of studies, suggested that sensitivity to the input (or lack thereof) may be the best explanation for fossilization in general (cf. the discussion of noticing in Chapter 4, section 4.6); and Selinker and Lakshmanan (1992) stipulated that it is all of these causes in various combination that can lead to fossilization.
Perhaps the biggest challenge when trying to understand fossilization is that there are two different meanings confounded in the concept. Some researchers discuss fossilization as an inevitable universal characteristic of all L2 learning. Under this perspective, fossilization ultimately means that L2 grammars cannot reach an isomorphic state with the grammars of native speakers. All learners are expected to fossilize, and the fact that some do sooner and others do later is of peripheral interest (e.g. Coppieters, 1987; Sorace, 1993; see the discussion about ultimate attainment and age in Chapter 2, section 2.4). In the name of fossilization, other researchers investigate the premature cessation of learning, as manifested, for instance, in the radically different outcomes reported after just three years of naturalistic learning in the cases of Julie (Chapter 2, section 2.2) and Wes (Chapter 4, section 4.1). For SLA researchers who have begun to examine L2 learning through a bilingual prism (Chapter 2, section 2.8), inevitable fossilization is problematic because it rests on a tautological and intractable assumption, namely that bilingual grammars will never become monolingual grammars. For language teachers, premature fossilization is of utmost interest. Yet, contemporary research on fossilization has favoured the ﬁrst notion and neglected the second one. This is not to say that individual variation in L2 learning has not received research attention. As we will see in the next three chapters, the study of cognitive, conative and affective sources of individual differences has a long history in SLA. However, differential learning rate, rather than the possibility of permanent cessation of learning, has been a central concern in the study of individual differences. Thus, until our understanding of rate and cessation of learning phenomena is better, a cautious attitude towards fossilization is advisable.

6.14	WHAT IS THE VALUE OF GRAMMAR INSTRUCTION? THE QUESTION OF THE INTERFACE	

The phenomena about interlanguage development that we have examined in this chapter have been documented across diverse contexts and thus are relevant for instructed as well as naturalistic learners. However, we should ask ourselves: What is the value of grammar instruction, if any, in the face of what we know about L2 development? This question has met with diverse answers in the ﬁeld of SLA.
Some experts question the value of instruction, based on the widely felt gap between the classroom and the outside world. If you have ever learned or taught a foreign language in the classroom, you too will no doubt remember many times when what was learned through grammar explanations and conscious effort did not transfer well to spontaneous, idiomatic usage in real-world situations. This was Krashen’s (1985) position when he distinguished between learning, or conscious knowledge obtained through grammar study, and acquisition, or the incidentally developed ability to use an L2 ﬂuently and naturally. He claimed that learning cannot become acquisition. Yet, the SLA scholarly community soon deemed it impossible to investigate these constructs and the related prediction, for a number of reasons that Barry McLaughlin (1987) authoritatively summarized a few years later (see particularly pp. 55–8).
Nevertheless, rather than disappearing, the issue has metamorphosed into the question of whether implicit and explicit knowledge can interface in long-term memory (see Chapter 5, section 5.4). Because many formal linguistic SLA researchers subscribe to the modularity hypothesis that we brieﬂy introduced in section 6.1, they argue that implicit (subconscious) and explicit (conscious) learning are supported by separate knowledge systems which are neurophysiologically distinct and thus cannot communicate. Schwartz (1993) explains this no interface position with the allegory of an electric shaver (instruction) and a plug (the language module):

Take a bearded man who moves to a foreign place. Unbeknownst to him, all men must be clean shaven in this culture. He soon discovers this custom, and he is the type that tries to ﬁt in as best he can in other cultures. Luckily for him, he has the solution: He (coincidentally) brought an electric shaver along, so logically the shaver is what is necessary to solve his problem. He goes to his hotel and plugs it in, but nothing happens. The current is different. It turns out that a transformer is needed to make the shaver work. Even though the shaver is necessary, it cannot be used.
(p. 153)

Although the possibility of a transformer remains open in this allegory, many Universal Grammar researchers are sceptical of any interface. Cognitively oriented SLA researchers, by way of contrast, endorse the position of two systems with an interface, at least for adults. Skill acquisition researchers have been particularly ﬁrm on this point, as they view deliberate and systematic practice as an optimal ‘transformer’, to build on Schwartz’s allegory above (see Chapter 5, sections 5.2 and 5.3; DeKeyser, 2007b). Usage-based and emergentist theories of L2 learning reject most dichotomies in traditional thinking about language and psychology and therefore ﬁnd the metaphor of two separate systems with an interface ‘an unfortunate appellation’ (Ellis and Larsen-Freeman, 2006, p. 569). They also accord explicit knowledge a smaller role in the overall task of acquisition (see sections 6.3 and 6.4) than skill acquisition theorists do. Nevertheless, they agree that L2 instruction has value. If instruction targets implicit processes, they argue, it can boost bottom-up induction of constructions by making exemplars in teaching materials more frequent, salient and consistent (Robinson and Ellis, 2008b). If instruction targets explicit processes, on the other hand, it can help summon conscious attention in ways needed to optimize the learning of particularly challenging generalizations, such as those that involve low salience or high complexity, and those that depart from what learners expect based on their L1 (N. Ellis, 2005). In a meta-analysis of 49 L2 studies reﬂective of the research of the 1990s, Norris and Ortega (2000) were able to show that, indeed, instruction targeting various kinds of implicit and explicit learning processes had sizeable effects. As Rod Ellis (2005) has pointed out, if both implicit and explicit knowledge are likely to be implicated in the learning of an L2, it will be important to investigate their respective contributions to L2 acquisition in much more detail in the future.

6.15	INSTRUCTION, DEVELOPMENT AND  LEARNER READINESS	

Most SLA researchers who believe in the value of grammar instruction also qualify their position with the proviso that instruction is constrained by development (just as the inﬂuence of the L1 is; cf. Chapter 3, sections 3.3 through 3.5). In other words, teachers can only hope to teach successfully what learners are developmentally ready to learn. This idea was formalized in the Teachability Hypothesis, also known as the issue of learner readiness, which Pienemann (1984, 1989) proposed in response to results he obtained in two quasi-experimental studies of German word order (see section 6.12 and Table 6.8). In them, he taught stage 4 (inversion) to ten seven- to nine-year-old Italian children in Germany and three adult classroom learners of German in Australia, respectively. On both occasions, those who beneﬁted from the instruction were ‘ready’ learners who exhibited evidence of stage 3 (verb separation) at the time of the teaching, but nothing was gained for the ‘unready’ learners who had begun the study at stage 2 (adverb preposing). In fact, Teresa, one of the unready young learners, began avoiding the use of adverb preposing (stage 2), presumably to avoid making errors. She may have been the type of accuracy-oriented learner who is concerned with perfectionism, as we will discuss in Chapter 9 (sections 9.3 and 9.4). In any case, error avoidance was an unwanted consequence that may have slowed her development of word order, since no stages, not even the ungrammatical stage 2, can be skipped. (As I have insistently reiterated in this book, an important lesson to be learned is that making fewer ‘errors’ is not always a good thing for language learning.) Later ﬁndings by Mackey (1999) and Spada and Lightbown (1999) suggest that some unready learners may beneﬁt from instruction on word order (of English question formation, in their studies; see Table 6.9), but that the effects are only modest enough to help them advance to the next stage prior to the one taught, not to skip stages. Thus, language teachers should care- fully consider what their students are developmentally ready to learn.
Although there is much merit in the principle of learner readiness, it should not be followed slavishly, because not all interlanguage systematicity presents equal challenges for instruction. True, for some developmental areas, such as sequences for word order (Tables 6.8 and 6.9) and tense and aspect morphology (Table 6.6), learners appear psycholinguistically unable to skip stages. But for other areas of the grammar, instruction above the cutting edge of a given interlanguage may accelerate development. Thus far, this has been shown to be possible only with language subsystems that exhibit crosslinguistic markedness relations, such as the development along the relative clause hierarchy in Table 6.7. Speciﬁcally, a good number of small-scale studies (e.g. Eckmann et al., 1988; Doughty, 1991) have reported that teaching object of preposition relative clauses to students who are already able to handle relativization, but only of the simplest subject type, can result in gains not only in the taught type but also in all the less marked intervening types in the hierarchy. For yet other grammar areas, instruction may be essentially unconstrained by readiness. This appears particularly plausible in matters of accuracy rather than emergence, for example, with the morpheme accuracy orders depicted in Table 6.4. In sum, developmental constraints on what can be taught are likely to play out differently across different areas of L2 development, and more research is needed to shed light that is of use in making instructional decisions.

6.16	ADVANTAGES OF GRAMMAR INSTRUCTION: ACCURACY AND RATE OF LEARNING	

While the value of language instruction regularly becomes the object of heated debates in scholarly and public policy circles, supporters and sceptics often fail to pay sufﬁcient attention to the fact that the accumulated evidence clearly shows accuracy and rate advantages for instruction. Simply put, instructed learners progress at a faster rate, they are likely to develop more elaborate language repertoires and they typically become more accurate than uninstructed learners.
Several compelling examples are available in the area of syntax. Thus, while many naturalistic L2 German learners may not reach the particle separation stage (stage 3) even after several years of living in the L2 environment (Meisel et al., 1981), in the foreign language classroom most students will have reached that stage (and some may even have traversed the entire developmental sequence!) by the end of the second semester, judging from the ﬁndings reported by Rod Ellis (1989) with 39 students of German in the United Kingdom and by Jansen (2008) with 21 students of German in Australia. For relativization, too, Pavesi (1986) found that only about 25 per cent of 38 naturalistic learners with six years on average of living in the L2 environment were capable of producing object of preposition relative clauses in English, whereas the same stage had been reached by about 40 per cent of 48 high- school students in Italy with an average of only four years of foreign language instruction. Likewise, Byrnes and Sinicrope (2008) found evidence of the object of preposition stage at just the end of the second year of study for about one-quarter of 23 college students of German in the United States that they investigated longitudinally. In addition, as mentioned in the previous section, the acquisition of relative clauses can be greatly accelerated when (more marked) object of preposition relative clause exemplars are presented or otherwise focused on in instructional materials, because the (less marked) direct object relative clause construction is learned for free, as it were (e.g. Doughty, 1991).
Evidence of clear rate and accuracy advantages of instruction is also available for L2 morphology. After daily use of English but without speciﬁc instruction, many naturalistic learners do not produce –ed or produce it with extremely low levels of accuracy. This has been documented for late starters (e.g. Alberto, as discussed in section 6.13; but also Wes, as brieﬂy noted in Chapter 4, section 4.1). It is also true of learners who had the advantage of a relatively early start when they were ﬁrst surrounded by the L2, as was the case for the two 10- and 12-year- old Vietnamese boys studied by Sato (1990) for ten months or the ten young Chinese children and adolescents studied by Jia and Fuse (2007) for ﬁve years. By comparison, Bardovi- Harlig (1995) found that 135 instructed English learners enrolled in a college English programme exhibited levels of accuracy in the use of –ed that averaged about 70 per cent for the lowest curricular level and 90 per cent for the highest. In addition, numerous quasi-experimental instructional studies have shown that providing any form of corrective feedback on the use of –ed to learners who already are using the simple past tense but at low levels of accuracy can foster more target- like performance (e.g. Doughty and Varela, 1998; Ellis et al., 2006).

6.17	THE FUTURE OF INTERLANGUAGE?	

Many questions remain regarding how and why L2 learners develop (or not) sufﬁciently detailed and idiomatic representations across various fundamental areas of grammar, and what roles various kinds of context and type of instruction can play in supporting or weakening success along the way. In the end, despite our incomplete knowledge, the study of interlanguage offers a valuable window into the recognition that the emergent competence of L2 users is shaped by the same systematicity and variability that shape all other forms of human language learning. Such recognition can help us combat deep-held views of learner language as a defective version of the target language and of errors as the sign of dangerous habits that need to be eradicated.
And, indeed, SLA has a distinguished lineage of empowering statements by interlanguage researchers to this effect. Since the inception of the ﬁeld, some have argued that language learners’ errors are a source of insights about the processes of second language learning (Corder, 1967; Selinker, 1972), others have called for the study of L2 development in its own right (Huebner, 1979, 1983), and yet others have warned against the fallacy of taking native speakers as an interpretive benchmark of learner language (Bley-Vroman, 1983). Yet, these good intentions and signs of enlightment have not been enough, and many if not most of the studies we have reviewed in this chapter suffer from what can be described as a ‘teleological’ view of interlanguage (Ortega and Byrnes, 2008, p. 287). That is, wittingly or unwittingly, SLA researchers often portray development as a transitional state that is (or should be) ever changing towards the target. Implied in this construal is also an idealized monolingual native speaker, who is held to be the ultimate yardstick of linguistic success. Harsh critiques have been levelled against this state of affairs. From a sociolinguistic prism, Sridhar (1994) suggested that SLA researchers need ‘a reality check’ in their silence about postcolonial and multilingual contexts for L2 learning all over the world, where the norm and model of nativeness makes no sense. From an educational stance, Seidlhofer (2001) lamented the conceptual gap between, on the one hand, the recognition that the native speaker is not the point of reference for L2 learning in many contexts of international communication, which is carried out almost exclusively among non- native speakers and, on the other hand, the inability to let that recognition permeate research programmes.
From within SLA, criticisms are also slowly mounting. From a psycholinguistic perspective, Cook (1991, 2008) has long argued that the emergent competence of bilinguals can hardly be expected to become isomorphic with the competence of monolinguals. From a concept-oriented perspective, Klein (1998) has accused researchers of treating ‘learners’ utterances as deviations from a certain target, instead of genuine manifestations of underlying language capacity’ (p. 527) and he has identiﬁed this deﬁcit orientation as the culprit for lack of disciplinary impact. From an emergentist and complexity theory perspective, Larsen-Freeman (2006) has expressed doubts on the value of past interlanguage ﬁndings because they are based on the metaphor of ‘a developmental ladder’ (p. 594). She sees a solution for- ward in her proposed view of languages (whether L2 or L1) as dynamic and self- organizing systems, ever adapting to changing contexts.
In an ethics-centred reﬂection about the value of instructed SLA research, I predicted that ‘the content of SLA constructs of high currency, such as interlanguage, target language, and fossilization, will undoubtedly need to be revised once the monolingual native speaker is no longer held as the legitimate model for L2 learning’ (Ortega, 2005, p. 433). It is yet to be seen if sufﬁcient future developments, whether in the emergentist direction envisioned in recent calls, or in other innovative directions, will help make it possible to study learner language in its own right and to overcome the analytical and conceptual pitfalls that arise when we equate L2 development with monolingual development.
