FOREIGN LANGUAGE APTITUDE

People greatly differ in how fast, how well and by what means they learn an additional language. The variability in rates, outcomes and processes can be strikingly large, particularly for people who begin learning an L2 later in life. For example, in Chapter 2 you read about Julie (Ioup et al., 1994), who was remembered by friends and family to be as good as native speakers after only two and a half years of ‘picking up’ Arabic from living immersed in the L2 environment; but you also read about Wes (Schmidt, 1983) in Chapter 4, who appeared to make only slow progress in his acquisition of English even after three years of positive engagement in the L2 environment. In light of this evidence, SLA researchers ask themselves: Is there something in learners’ cognitive abilities, their motivations and their personal predispositions that could help explain such a wide variation? This question guides the study of what is known as individual differences in L2 learning, an area of SLA that draws on theories and methods from the neighbouring ﬁelds of cognitive, social and crosscultural psychology.
In this chapter we will examine aptitude, a construct that is mostly cognitive. In Chapter 8, we will discuss motivation, a conative construct. Aptitude and motivation alone are the two best-researched sources of individual differences in L2 learning. However, a number of other sources of variability in L2 learning have attracted considerable attention as well, and they are associated to affective dimensions, such as temperament, emotions and preferences for how to process new information. We will complete our treatment of individual differences with an examination of these other aspects in Chapter 9. You will ﬁnd the topics across the three chapters are often interconnected. You will also notice that much of what we know about individual differences pertains mostly to formal learning by (highly literate) adolescents and adults in schools and universities. We simply lag behind in knowledge about individual differences as they play out under conditions of naturalistic learning and by children and adults from a wider range of socioeconomic and educational backgrounds.
Throughout the three chapters devoted to individual differences in L2 learning, you will see that the psychology of learners is difﬁcult to extract away from their learning contexts and lived experiences. As you read on, some questions may linger in your mind: Are many or even most of these individual differences immutable? To what extent do context and life experience contribute to shaping and even changing such abilities, motivations and predispositions? In these three chapters the answers you will ﬁnd to these questions are framed by a psychological framing of both learner and context, which is theoretically congruent with an individual differences framework. You will encounter social accounts of why people may vary in their L2 learning processes and outcomes in Chapter 10.

7.1	THE CORRELATIONAL APPROACH TO COGNITION, CONATION AND AFFECT IN PSYCHOLOGY AND SLA	

Psychologists interested in individual differences have traditionally made a distinction among three concepts. Cognition refers to how information is processed and learned by the human mind; conation addresses how humans use will and freedom to make choices that result in new behaviours; and affect encompasses issues of temperament, emotions and how humans feel towards information, people, objects, actions and thoughts. However, contemporary psychologists recognize one must consider cognitive, conative and affective explanations in a symbiotic fashion in order to fully understand individual differences. Likewise, SLA researchers are increasingly more willing to examine aptitude, motivation and other sources of individual differences in L2 learning in the context of complex interrelationships among cognition, conation and affect.
Given the psychological roots of this topic, it should not be a surprise to see that correlations are widely used by individual differences researchers. I will often mention correlation coefﬁcients (called r) and shared variance (called r2) when referring to study results in Chapters 7 through 9. Correlation coefﬁcients indicate the degree to which two sets of scores co-vary together, from 0 to 1 in either a positive or a negative pattern. It is important to keep in mind the positive or negative sign of the correlation as well as the size of it. For example, a positive-sign (and large) correlation between introversion and lexical diversity would indicate that the more introverted a person, the higher their lexical diversity scores are likely to be (and that this relationship is strong); but a negative-sign (and large) correlation between the same two variables would mean that the more introverted a person is, the lower their lexical diversity scores are (and that this relationship is strong). In fact, the closer to a perfect 1, positive or negative, the stronger the relationship; the closer to 0, whether in the positive or negative direction, the weaker the relationship. Shared variance or r2 is another index that provides an intuitive estimate of the magnitude of the relationship between two sets of scores. It simply tells us the percentage of overlap between two observed sets of scores, or what percentage of variance can be explained by the two variables. It is reported by many psychology authors, but even if it is not reported it can be easily calculated by the attentive reader if correlation values are given, just by squaring them (hence the name r2).
The prevailing power of correlational survey methods and the emphasis on group tendencies can sometimes make research on individual differences dangerously faceless. To ameliorate this, I would like to open our discussion with a qualitative comparison of two fascinating book-length autobiographical accounts: French Lessons by Alice Kaplan (1993) and The Philosopher’s Demise: Learning French by Richard Watson (1995). I ﬁrst had notice of them thanks to SLA researcher John Schumann, who studied these two and other cases in Schumann (1997). The books are written by academics who are not linguists. Their stories and self-chronicled L2 experiences will offer a tangible way to frame our understanding of individual differences in L2 learning in this chapter and the next two.

7.2	LEARNING AND NOT LEARNING FRENCH: KAPLAN VS. WATSON         

Alice Kaplan grew up in Minnesota in the 1960s. In her 1993 book, she tells the story of the development of her unconditional, life-long afﬁliation with French. Her memoirs begin at the age of eight, when her father, a Jewish lawyer who prosecuted Nazi war criminals at Nuremberg, died. Kaplan explains that she felt a deep connection between feeling the loss of her father and feeling different from others in her pursuit of French: ‘Learning French was connected to my father, because French made me absent the way he was absent, and it made me an expert the way he was an expert’ (pp. 203–4). She began studying French in grade 5, and at the age of 14 attended a French immersion summer programme in Maine. The two formative experiences, however, were a year abroad in a French-medium school in Switzerland at the age of 15, while still in high school, and another academic year abroad in Bordeaux three years later, while she was a French literature undergraduate. Her interest was always as intense for French culture as it was for the French language: ‘even in beginning French classes, you knew there was a French beyond the everyday, a France of hard talk and intellect’ (p. 138). By the end of the two full-year study abroad experiences, a complete self-identiﬁcation with the new community and culture had taken place. She later became a French language teacher and eventually completed a doctorate in French. To this day, Kaplan is committed to a life in which both French and English play prominent roles.
Richard Watson grew up in Iowa in the 1930s. In his 1995 book, he describes his strenuous and anxiety-driven attempts at learning to speak French at age 55. As a college philosophy major, at the age of 19, he had successfully completed a French course that involved ten weekly hours of intensive reading-only instruction over an academic year. He went on to do a Master’s and a doctorate in philosophy in the early 1960s. His speciality being in Cartesian philosophy, over the next 25 years of his successful academic career he regularly read and translated complex philosophy texts in French and he also frequently travelled to Paris and other locations in France, spending much time in French libraries. In 1986, at the age of 55, a serendipitous life event made him want to learn how to speak (not just read and translate) French. He was invited to deliver a paper in French at an important Cartesian conference in Paris. This propelled an intense desire in him: ‘All those years of guilt and embarrassment at being a Cartesian scholar who could not speak French … I would learn to speak French, whatever it took, however long’ (p. 65). He took French tutorials for three hours a week during six months prior to his travel and then decided to take more French classes at the Alliance Française after the conference, while he was spending his summer in Paris. Despite all these efforts, he failed his ﬁnal examination (‘the ﬁrst course and the only examination I had ever failed in my life’, p. 122) and could not move on to the next curricular level at the Alliance. The book ends with a painful dialogue during a dinner conversation towards the end of Watson’s three-month stay in Paris. He is curtly informed by a famous French Cartesian specialist: ‘Don’t try to speak French. Your French is terrible’ (p. 133). With this ending, readers cannot but conclude that Watson will never achieve his dream to ‘sit at a table in a restaurant in Paris with a group of French Cartesian scholars, and … talk’ (p. 65). Almost inexplicably, he had been defeated in his pursuit to learn to speak French.
How can the very different cases of Kaplan and Watson be explained? One might note the differing ages at which each began learning the L2 (see Chapter 2). Nevertheless, why was Kaplan so intensely attracted to French as a child? Does her love for everything French at a young age sufﬁce to explain her amazing success in learning the language and her life-long commitment to it? How can we explain that this love only grew with time and experiences, rather than, say, wane and leave room for other important life quests? And, conversely, what are the roots for the ‘French failure’ in Watson’s case? Why were his determination and desire to speak French well (and his energetic efforts at getting there) not enough? How can we explain that such a highly educated, creative and risk-taking individual – someone who had excelled in life not only as a philosopher, but also as a bestselling author, aerial photographer and amateur ﬁeld archaeologist! – could not master spoken French?
The cases of Kaplan and Watson are not the rare ﬁgment of literary embellishment. Neither are they typical only of people who try to learn a foreign language in the formal setting of a classroom, as similar differences have been attested by research with naturalistic learners as well, for example, in the cases of Julie and Wes. How can we explain such radical variability across individuals who, due to various elective or circumstantial reasons, attempt to learn an L2?

7.3	LANGUAGE APTITUDE, ALL MIGHTY?	

An intuitive reaction to cases of amazing success like those of Alice Kaplan and Julie is that they may have had a special gift for learning foreign languages. We all have admired someone who seemed to have ‘an ear’ for foreign languages, ‘a knack’ for language learning. It must be a matter of abilities, we assume, and abilities we are born with, at that. At ﬁrst blush, this intuition is supported by the research ﬁndings. When employing any of the various language aptitude tests available and correlating the resulting scores with proﬁciency levels, ﬁnal course grades, or teacher ratings, researchers typically ﬁnd correlations that fall in the range between r = 0.40 and r = 0.60. That is, study after study, aptitude and achievement explain each other or overlap with each other by 16 to 36 per cent. For some, this is a remarkable amount of patterned variation in a phenomenon as multivariate as second language learning.
 
 

Should we then conclude that language aptitude is an omnipotent force in language learning? Not quite. Once we go beyond a strict prediction of achievement, the almighty quality of the construct breaks down into a handful of more humble questions. For one, what does it mean to say that someone has a special gift for foreign languages? Do we mean ease for learning it fast (a posited advantage in L2 learning rate) or do we mean ability for learning it extremely well (a posited advantage in absolute capacity for very advanced attainment)? Could it be that individuals who are talented foreign language learners are simply highly intelligent, or perhaps particularly verbally gifted in their ﬁrst language? Does aptitude matter across ages and conditions of learning? And what is language aptitude made of, in the ﬁrst place? Some of these difﬁcult questions have engaged L2 aptitude researchers for nearly a century now. Yet, as will become clear in subsequent sections, our success in understanding L2 aptitude has been limited. This is partly because much less effort has been invested in explaining the construct than in developing tests that measure it, and partly because until recently the relevant research has attempted in vain to isolate cognitive abilities from the other conative, affective and contextual affordances of the various environments in which L2 learning happens.

7.4	APTITUDE AS PREDICTION OF FORMAL L2 LEARNING RATE: THE MLAT	

Psychological work on foreign language aptitude began in the 1920s but did not witness a ﬁrst renaissance until post-World War II times. The true peak occurred in 1953, when late Harvard psychologist and founder of language aptitude research John Carroll secured a ﬁve-year grant from the Carnegie Corporation of New York that allowed him to develop his Modern Language Aptitude Test (MLAT) (Modern Language Aptitude Test, 2000–2001; Carroll, 1981). The MLAT turned out to be extremely successful as a predictive test of language learning rate in formal instruction settings, and it remains the aptitude instrument most widely used in the United States and (in translation) in other countries. It comprises ﬁve subtests designed to tap three cognitive abilities: grammatical sensitivity, phonetic coding ability and memory capacity. The test content and design is shown in Table 7.1. There is a long and a short form. The long form contains a total of 146 items and the typical average performance reported across studies falls between 100 and 135 points (e.g. Wesche, 1981; Ehrman, 1998). Thus, if you ever take the long form of the MLAT and you score above 100, or perhaps above 135 points, you know your foreign language aptitude is deﬁnitely above average.
The high predictive validity of the MLAT (as mentioned, between 16 per cent and 36 per cent of shared variance with achievement) is coupled with high content and face validity as well. For example, as you can see in Table 7.1, a good part of the MLAT stimuli are ‘linguistic material that would be novel to the examinees’ (Carroll, 1981, p. 89), just like any new language would be novel to zero-beginning learners. Likewise, two of the subtests are aurally delivered, reﬂecting the primarily oral nature of much language learning in the beginning stages. Nevertheless, the construct validity of the MLAT has been the target of critiques which have cast doubt on whether it measures aptitude per se, as it purports to do. For one, the ﬁve subtests reﬂect only three of the four components that Carroll thought made up language aptitude. The fourth component, inductive language learning ability, was left out (cf. Table 7.1) for reasons that were never fully discussed. Perhaps the most serious criticisms are the following two. One, as SLA individual differences authority Peter Skehan (2002) points out, the conceptualization of the three constructs that the test does address is outdated, and this is particularly evident in the memory capacity component, which is conceptualized as rote memory in the MLAT. This is in contrast to the centrality of dynamic memory models in contemporary cognitive psychology (see Chapter 5, section 5.8). Two, as also prominent SLA aptitude specialist Peter Robinson (2005a) notes, present-day L2 aptitude researchers are not so much interested in understanding differential potential for L2 learning rate in formal classroom contexts. Instead, two other issues are considered more pressing and theoretically interesting today: adult learners’ differential potential to achieve the highest levels possible of ultimate attainment, and the relevance of aptitude across various learning conditions, including people’s differential ability to learn from implicit versus explicit and from naturalistic versus more decontextualized language experiences.
Despite the increasingly critical appraisal of the test and the availability of alternative aptitude instruments, the MLAT remains extremely popular among SLA researchers even today. In the end, however, no test administration or correlational prediction can tell us whether language aptitude really exists, and if so, what it is made of.

7.5	IS L2 APTITUDE DIFFERENT FROM INTELLIGENCE AND FIRST LANGUAGE ABILITY?	

In an oft-cited aptitude study, Marjorie Wesche (1981) reported that out of 455 Canadian Public Service French language trainees she investigated, the 165 partici- pants with the highest MLAT scores also had statistically signiﬁcantly higher intel- ligence scores. In other aptitude studies too, the MLAT Words in Sentences subtest (see Table 7.1) was repeatedly found to correlate with intelligence. Thus, it is legiti- mate to ask whether L2 aptitude may not simply be a spin-off of intelligence. After reviewing the available evidence, however, Skehan (1998) concluded that intelli- gence partially overlaps with foreign language aptitude for grammatical sensitivity (as in Words in Sentences) and other tests of analytical ability, but not for other com- ponents of the construct. Intelligence psychologist Robert Sternberg (2002) ﬁnds the overlap rather unsurprising, since some of the same narrow academic abilities implicated in traditional intelligence measures (e.g. IQ tests) are also implicated in the construct of grammatical sensitivity that is measured in traditional language aptitude tests like the MLAT. Sternberg calls for future research programmes that explore less conventional dimensions of both constructs.
 

There has also always been concern with the real possibility that foreign language aptitude may just be a residue or by-product of differential mother tongue ability. The most striking evidence comes from Skehan (1986), who conducted a ten-year retrospective longitudinal follow-up to the Bristol Language Project (Wells, 1985). Wells’ study was a seminal investigation of the ﬁrst language acquisition of two cohorts of 128 children, who were recorded every three months for about two years, starting at ages between one and three and ending at ages between three and ﬁve, respectively. Ten years later, Skehan was able to test a subsample of these children (now 13 to 15 years old) for foreign language aptitude and for attained proﬁciency after their ﬁrst year of French or German study in school. He found, as expected, that the scores on a battery of L2 aptitude measures correlated with the concurrent L2 proﬁciency measures. More unexpectedly, however, several aptitude measures (precisely those tapping analytical and grammatical abilities) correlated in the range of r = 0.40 with some of the L1 ability measures drawn from the language samples collected a full ten years earlier! On the other hand, none of the L1 measures was associated directly with current L2 proﬁciency scores. This Skehan (1998) interprets as ﬁrm indication that ﬁrst language ability and the grammatical sensitivity component of foreign language aptitude are related, but that ﬁrst language ability and overall aptitude are distinct factors.
In the end, then, the conclusion reached by L2 aptitude scholars is that intelligence, ﬁrst language ability and foreign language aptitude partially overlap because they all seem to share a substrate in which academic skills and grammatical sensitivity are implicated. However, the three constructs are sufﬁciently different from one another to be considered distinct and worthy of investigation, each on its own.

7.6	LACK OF L2 APTITUDE, OR GENERAL LANGUAGE-RELATED DIFFICULTIES?	

When one thinks of the relationship between foreign language aptitude and ﬁrst language ability, a related line of reasoning is that difﬁculties in learning an L2 may be related to difﬁculties experienced during the most challenging aspect of L1 learning: literacy. This hypothesis has been investigated by learning disabilities experts Richard Sparks and Leonore Ganschow (see Sparks, 2006). In work they developed with other colleagues over the 1990s, they took as their point of departure what they call the Linguistic Coding Differences Hypothesis. The hypothesis posits that people differ in their ability to handle phonological–orthographic processing operations, in their L1 as much as in their L2. Difﬁculties in the mother tongue may become apparent in the early school years. Indeed, as many as 15 to 20 per cent of all schoolchild- ren will experience difﬁculties associated with speciﬁc literacy tasks in the critical months when they begin learning how to read (International Dyslexia Association, 1998). Many will be diagnosed with some language-based learning disability. Diagnosed children are usually treated. In other cases, difﬁculties remain undiagnosed and are overcome on their own; and yet other times they persist undetected.
 
 

Individuals who experienced (diagnosed or undetected) language-based learning difﬁculties during early schooling may try to learn a foreign language later in school or even in college, and then the difﬁculties may resurface.
These general-language coding and processing difﬁculties emerge most clearly in the areas of phonological awareness, which is deﬁned by Snow et al. (1998) as ‘a general appreciation of the sounds of speech as distinct from their meaning’ (p. 51). Within phonological awareness, critical areas of difﬁculty are phonemic awareness, which is deﬁned as the ability to segment sounds (e.g. k-æ-t in cat) and ‘hidden’ parts in spoken words and put them back together (e.g. transformation = trans + form + ation), and phonological decoding, which refers to the ﬂuent ability to access spelling cues and automatically integrate them to identify words and retrieve associated meanings. These abilities make it possible to read ﬂuently in our L1 and they can be measured via a variety of experimental tasks like syllable deletion, pseudoword repetition, speeded word naming or word recognition. As you can easily see if you inspect the sample items for Parts 1 and 3 of the MLAT in Table 7.1, these abilities are similar to the skills implicated in the phonetic coding component of L2 aptitude.
In sustained longitudinal work, Finnish researcher Mia Dufva and several Dutch colleagues have investigated deep and complex relationships between phonological awareness and foreign language aptitude, tracing the relationship of these two and several other variables to phonological memory, which many consider the underlying substrate that helps explain differential language and literacy capacities in the L1 and L2 alike (Dufva and Voeten, 1999; Dufva et al., 2001). The team investigated Finnish children in preschool up to the end of the third grade. It appears that phonological memory exerted a direct and stable inﬂuence on the levels of L1 phonological awareness developed by the children at about age six, and an indirect inﬂuence (via this differential phonological awareness) on the levels of L1 word recognition and listening comprehension that they went on to achieve by about age seven or eight. By age eight or nine, in turn, the latter two variables predicted a large proportion of children’s L1 reading comprehension levels (60 per cent of the shared variance in the sample of 222 children in Dufva et al., 2001). Finally, after the ﬁrst year of studying English as a foreign language in school, at about age nine, native language literacy levels (measured via word recognition and reading comprehension), together with phonological memory (measured through an English-sounding non-word repetition task), helped explain a large proportion of the individual variation in attained communicative English proﬁciency (58 per cent of the shared variance in the sample of 160 children in Dufva and Voeten, 1999). Thus, the quality of automaticity and ﬂuency when handling literacy in the L1 appears to be related to, and to be largely predictive of, the facility exhibited by schoolchildren in learning a foreign language.
At this juncture it is informative to return to our less successful French learner, Watson (1995). Consider the recollection he offers in the following excerpt (pp. 102–3):

(1)	I have always thought my bad spelling [in English] was due to inattention as to whether words end, say, with ‘an’ or ‘on’ and the like. Would not impatient inattention also explain how I can look up the spelling of a word, clamp the dictionary shut, and then turn to my writing and still not know how to spell it? I had gone to the procedure of looking it up; did I have to remember it, too? And doesn’t everyone now and then reverse letters and numbers – ‘57’ for ‘75’ and even ‘Nood Gight’? Just today I asked for the ‘palt and sepper’ at lunch, and as long as I can remember I have made that kind of exchange of initial letters perhaps once a week. Is that a kind of dyslexia? It really is not a serious problem in speaking and spelling. What is serious is my inability to listen to sounds and repeat them back. I was poor at memorizing poems and piano pieces in my youth.

Watson’s description strikingly resonates with the claims of Sparks and Gaschow’s Linguistic Coding Differences Hypothesis and with the picture of com- plex differential L1 and L2 development that Dufva and her colleagues paint of Finnish children. It is also consistent with many of the symptoms associated with the kinds of general language coding and processing difﬁculties described in the specialized literature. These are the symptoms experienced by individuals who perform low on phonetic coding ability tasks such as those contained in Parts 1 through 3 of the MLAT. For example, Wesche (1981) observed that they show more disﬂuent L2 spoken production. Similarly, Carroll and others hypothesized that they may have difﬁculties with mimicking foreign sounds and remembering new words.
In her review of the evidence, Yale psychologist Elena Grigorenko (2002) concludes that ‘there is a nonrandom association between failure to master [a foreign language] and difﬁculties in acquiring [the native language] in both its oral and its written formats’ (p. 100). Ultimately, and in agreement with the ﬁndings reported by Dufva and her colleagues, she attributes linguistic coding difﬁculties to differential memory capacity. And, indeed, memory has always occupied a privileged place in conceptualizations of L2 aptitude.

7.7	MEMORY CAPACITY AS A PRIVILEGED COMPONENT OF L2 APTITUDE 

Perhaps the ﬁrst signs of interest in exceptional memory capacities are those of neuropsychologists, rather than SLA researchers, who during the 1970s and 1980s discovered individuals with colossal foreign language talents and studied their brain functioning in depth (e.g. Schneiderman and Desmarais, 1988; Obler, 1989; Smith and Tsimpli, 1995). A notable example is CJ, described by Obler (1989) as a 29-year-old Caucasian male who from the age of 15 managed to learn very well ﬁve languages through a mixture of instruction and naturalistic exposure. He learned French, German, Latin and Spanish by studying them in high school and later through further study and living abroad. And he later learned Moroccan Arabic after college, through a mixture of instruction and naturalistic immersion while holding a government post in the country.
As Obler and Hannigan (1996) explain, exceptional verbal memory abilities consistently emerged as the distinguishing trait in all these case studies, in association with talented L1 verbal performance and with a cognitive style that favours successful performance on tasks that call for implicit and memory-based processing. At the same time, the talent was said to be symptomatic of some abnormality in these individuals’ brain functioning, possibly due to hormonal ‘accidents’ during foetal development of the brain. It was commented that such exceptional verbal abilities and foreign language feats appear in people who exhibit some genetically inherited characteristics, including left-handedness, occurrence of twins in the family and propensity to allergies. Thus, a danger in this early line of research was that a colossal talent for foreign languages was easily reconstrued as a freakish one.
Contemporary SLA researchers who investigate aptitude and memory capacity appear to have little interest in pursuing case studies of individuals who are exceptional (with or without a pathological proﬁle) and concentrate instead on studying within-normal ranges of individual differences in group performances. In this more recent line of research, good memory capacity, including verbal memory and memory as a substrate of both L1 and L2 skills, remains a prime candidate in explanations of differential levels of L2 achievement.
It has been shown that short-term memory capacity measured by span task performance (see Table 5.1) can predict individual differences in the ability to learn new vocabulary in a foreign language, with correlations that fall typically between r = 0.30 and 0.40. For example, Helsinki-based researcher Elisabet Service (1992; Service and Kohonen, 1995) found that Finnish elementary schoolchildren who were good at repeating random non-word lists also learned vocabulary in English as a foreign language with greater facility than other children with lower span scores. Likewise, adults with low short-term memory capacities have difﬁculty remembering new words. For example, Chun and Payne (2004) tracked the look-up behaviour exhibited by 13 second-year L2 German college students as they worked through reading materials on a computer program. They found that the individuals who performed poorly on a non-word repetition task looked up vocabulary three times more often than those with high memory span scores.
Memory capacity has also been related to differential achievement in L2 listening ability and overall L2 proﬁciency by Mary Lee Scott, who conducted two early studies investigating these issues. In the ﬁrst study (published under her maiden name: Call, 1985) the listening proﬁciency scores of 41 ESL students from Arabic and Spanish L1 backgrounds correlated the strongest with recall of L2 words in passages (r = 0.57) and repetition of exact sentences (r = 0.65). The participants in the second study (Scott, 1994) were 112 male and female missionaries sampled by age into younger (in their early twenties) and older (between 50 and 79 years old) and by language learning experience into monolingual (who had served in English- speaking missions) and bilingual (who had served in Spanish-speaking missions). As it turned out, the younger bilingual group had achieved consistently higher L2 proﬁciency levels than the older bilingual group after the same period of approximately a year and a half of living abroad. The gap was substantial. For example, on the L2 listening test, the younger bilingual group attained a 90 per cent performance level on average, whereas the older bilingual group’s average was 42 per cent. Contrary to Scott’s expectations, however, once proﬁciency was controlled for statistically, no relationship between short-term memory performance and proﬁciency scores was observed on a rich battery of eight memory tests. Nevertheless, a closer look at other reported results is revealing. Scott compared ten participants in the younger bilingual group with four participants in the older bilingual group, all matched for listening proﬁciency at about 80 per cent scoring level. If you inspect the descriptive data she offers there, you will notice that the four older bilingual participants’ memory performance was remarkably higher than that typical for their age group and much closer to the means obtained for the younger bilingual group. This makes for suggestive, if tentative, evidence that above average short-term memory capacities may have been a requisite for the older learners in this sample to attain levels of L2 listening proﬁciency that were uncharacteristic of their own age group and comparable to the high levels achieved by many younger learners.
Interest in aptitude and memory research has recently been shifting towards active working memory capacity, in accord with contemporary developments in the study of human memory (see Chapter 5, sections 5.6 through 5.8). The ﬁrst SLA investigation in this line of research was an oft-cited study by Michael Harrington and Mark Sawyer (1992), who found that individuals with longer reading spans achieved higher scores on the grammar and reading subsections of the TOEFL, with 30 per cent co-variance between the two measures. However, when Alan Juffs (2004) used very similar working memory measures to investigate individual differences in online processing of ambiguous L2 sentences (rather than attained global proﬁciency) the evidence he found for a role of working memory in such L2 performance was extremely weak.

7.8	THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF MEMORY TO APTITUDE, COMPLEXIFIED       

Current enthusiasm for the study of individual differences in working memory and L2 learning needs to be tempered by the realization that the ways in which memory facilitates differential rate and success of L2 learning may be more complex than a simple correlation between memory tasks and proﬁciency measures can capture. For example, clear evidence shows that the much talked about power of memory span tasks to predict L2 vocabulary learning rate is strongest at very early stages of development but weakens as proﬁciency in the L2 increases. Thus, Masoura and Gathercole (2005) found that the ability to repeat non-words in the L1 (Greek) and the L2 (English) was associated with the L2 vocabulary levels achieved by 75 8- to 13-year-old Greek children after three years of formal EFL study. Yet, the facility in adding new English words to the lexicon already in place after three years was greater for a subset of students with higher than average L2 vocabulary knowledge but not for a subset of students with higher than average non-word repetition abilities. The authors conclude that once a threshold size of vocabulary knowledge is established in the L2, further vocabulary learning is boosted by a better developed and larger-sized L2 mental lexicon rather than by superior memory capacity.
In fact, rather than remaining constant, the predictive power of phonological memory capacity may well shift to different aspects of learning as individuals traverse their L2 developmental pathways. That is, perhaps memory helps explain differential success at early stages better in some areas and at later stages better in other areas. This is precisely what O’Brien et al. (2006) suggest in their study of L2 changes observed over a semester among 43 L2 Spanish learners. They found that among the lower proﬁciency learners better phonological memory was associated with greater gains in lexical areas of L2 performance (narrative skills and content word use). Among the higher proﬁciency learners, by contrast, higher memory capacity was associated with greater gains in grammatical areas (subordination and function word use). If these ﬁndings withstand the test of time and replication, we may eventually need to revise the intuitive dictum that ‘good memory helps foreign language learning’, and replace it with a more nuanced formulation, such as ‘good memory helps vocabulary learning in the beginning and grammar learning later on’.
Even within the same area of L2 learning, short-term memory capacity may predict individual differences for some speciﬁc L2 phenomena better than for others. John Williams (2005) raises this possibility in the area of L2 grammar, based on the ﬁndings he obtained across several investigations of implicit L2 learning (that is, learning without the beneﬁt of rule explanation; see Chapter 5, section 5.14). In some experiments he found that differential performance on non- word repetition span tasks was clearly correlated with the participants’ ability to learn certain rules that involve surface form–form co-occurrence (e.g. gender agreement in la musica moderna, where each word ends in –a; Williams, 1999; Williams and Lovatt, 2003). However, in other experiments, such as Williams (2005), which we brieﬂy mentioned in Chapter 3 (section 3.9), it turned out to be unrelated to the ability to learn semantically motivated artiﬁcial grammar rules, such as: ‘gi and ro both mean “the-near”; we say gi cow because “cow” is a living thing but ro cushion because “cushion” is a nonliving object’.
Finally, interesting is the suggestion put forth by Alison Mackey and colleagues (Mackey et al., 2002) that for certain areas of learning, such as learning from interactions (see Chapter 4, sections 4.4 and 4.7), high memory capacities may accrue an advantage that is measurable only after a certain time lag. In their study these researchers found that, as predicted, ten high-memory speakers were superior to ten low-memory speakers at noticing the corrections they received during interactions with more proﬁcient interlocutors. In terms of actual L2 gains, however, a trend on the post-tests indicated that low-memory speakers outperformed the high-memory ones on the immediate test, whereas the high- memory speakers showed lagged gains on a delayed post-test two weeks later. The researchers comment: ‘Although speculative, it may be that these learners had gleaned more data to process [during the interactional treatment] and consolidated this over time, compared to low WM capacity learners who could not “hold on” to data with great accuracy’ (p. 204). As can be appreciated, research on the relationship between memory and differential L2 achievement has only begun to scratch the surface.

7.9	APTITUDE AND AGE	

Many SLA researchers believe that children learn their ﬁrst language so well because they have the cognitive and linguistic endowment to learn it entirely implicitly. Conversely, they posit that adolescents and adults will rarely if ever attain complete success in learning an L2 because they try to learn the language via analysis and analogy (that is, explicitly) and in doing so they are using the ‘wrong’ route, as it were (although for good reason, these researchers say, since for adults analysis may be the only route left available for language learning). This is, in a nutshell, the Fundamental Difference Hypothesis ﬁrst formulated by Bley-Vroman (1990). It is because of the involvement of the less adept explicit learning route, the contention goes, that late-starting learners will vary greatly in their facility and relative success with the task, depending on how naturally good their analytical capacities (for explicit learning) and their memory (for implicit learning) are. Children, by way of contrast, will uniformly develop their L1 competence because they rely on implicit (tacit, intuitive) types of innate language learning mechanisms. One corollary of such a position is that aptitude (as well as other individual differences) should matter only or mostly when learning the L2 after a certain age. Do individual differences matter even for young L2 learners?
DeKeyser (2000) found support for the claim that aptitude only matters for adults and adolescents, but not for young learners, in his partial replication of Johnson and Newport (1989) with 57 Hungarian US immigrants (see our discussion in Chapter 2, section 2.4). Performance on the Words in Sentences subtest of the MLAT correlated with the grammaticality judgements for only the subset of participants whose age of arrival in the L2 environment was above 16. For arrivals below 15 years of age, no relationship between aptitude and ultimate attainment was found, as predicted. These ﬁndings are difﬁcult to interpret, however. This is because all but one of the participants who had arrived before the age of 16 answered correctly at least 180 of the 200 items on the grammaticality judgement task. With so little variation in their linguistic performance, correlations are unlikely. This stems from the psychometric reality that low variability in either set of two given scores will attenuate or eliminate any possibility of correlation (whether we have good theoretical reasons to posit a relationship between the two variables or not).
Other researchers have taken a slightly different approach to investigating the relationship between age and aptitude. Harley and Hart (1997) predicted that individual differences will be found at all ages (provided the situation is one of L2, as opposed to L1, learning), but that different dimensions of aptitude will matter more at different ages. Harley and Hart reasoned that, since memory is heavily involved in general implicit learning processes and analytical processing of information in general explicit learning processes, memory may be more predictive of differential outcomes with young learners, whereas analytical ability might play a much larger role in explaining differential success among older learners. They found some evidence in support of this hypothesis in the context of French school immersion education in Canada. Proﬁciency differences in a group of early-starting students (who began immersion in grade 1 and had been schooled in the L2 for 12 years) correlated to individual differences in memory ability, whereas in a group of late-starting students (who began immersion in grade 7 and had been schooled in the L2 for four years), proﬁciency differences were more related to individual differences in analytical ability. As the authors warn, however, the reason for this pattern of results may in part be a consequence of how young and old starters had grown accustomed to approach French in their classroom instruction. Namely, the curriculum in French immersion education is age-appropriate, and therefore it capitalizes on memory-related activities at younger ages only to gradually move on, in older grades, to more ‘school-like’ activities that pose higher analytical processing demands. Thus, it is a challenge to separate age and learning context when investigating these questions. Harley and Hart (2002) followed up on these issues with a second study, conducted with Canadian students of similar age (tenth- and eleventh-graders) but enrolled in non-immersion French instruction and hence similar in learning history to the previous group of late starters. The 27 participants took part in a three-month bilingual exchange programme in a Francophone environment which afforded them their ﬁrst immersion-like experience, after about seven years of formal French classroom instruction. An association between analytical kinds of aptitude and proﬁciency scores was observed despite the three months of immersion, but the researchers caution that this pattern of results for late starters was less clear than it had been in the earlier study.
Ross et al. (2002) concur with DeKeyser in reporting ﬁndings that support his claim that the importance of aptitude emerges only after puberty (in their study, around the age of 12). In their discussion, however, they offer useful insights that bring the position closer to that of Harley and Hart. Speciﬁcally, Ross et al. suggest that aptitude will matter gradually more as starting age is older. This will happen as a result not only of biological maturation (older age) but in conjunction with the learning context. Speciﬁcally, many older-starting learners typically obtain less abundant exposure to natural input, because they tend to learn the L2 through formal classroom instruction. Therefore, both age and reliance on formal instruction will conspire to make aptitude differences matter much more for such late starters.

7.10	DOES L2 APTITUDE MATTER UNDER EXPLICIT AND IMPLICIT LEARNING CONDITIONS?	

An extension of the question of whether aptitude matters across all ages is the problem of whether aptitude matters across all learning conditions, particularly learning with or without intention, attention, awareness and rules, as we discussed in Chapter 5 (see sections 5.9 through 5.15). During the 1970s and 1980s, Stephen Krashen in the United States and Helmut Zobl in Canada reasoned that aptitude differences would be only relevant when learning with rules, that is, with explicit instruction, because such learning involves conceptually driven processing that depends heavily on overall intelligence and academic abilities. Aptitude would probably not matter in conditions of implicit learning (by which they meant incidental learning, or learning language while doing something else; see section
5.10) because there all humans are endowed with the same universal capacity to implicitly (by which they meant tacitly or intuitively) learn language. Their logic was based on a broadly Chomskyan position of continuous availability of implicit (Universal Grammar based) learning even for adults (see Schwartz, 1998; and our discussions in Chapter 6, sections 6.1 and 6.14).
Robinson (2002) makes a counterproposal, claiming that for adults aptitude will matter equally across all conditions of learning because the same basic cognitive abil- ities are involved in any kind of language learning. This hypothesis stems from the position of SLA researchers who do not commit to a Chomskyan view of language learning and instead posit that language learning is a general cognitive phenome- non, like learning history, mathematical operations, music or cooking (e.g. DeKeyser, 1997; Segalowitz, 2003; see discussion in Chapter 5, sections 5.1 through 5.3). They would predict that individual differences matter across explicit and implicit condi- tions of learning because humans draw from both implicit and explicit general learn- ing processes in order to learn additional languages beyond their mother tongue.
Of course, still under a general cognition theory of L2 learning (rather than a Chomskyan one), it is also reasonable to expect that aptitude will make the most important contribution to success precisely under implicit learning conditions, when people receive no external help and are left to rely on their own devices and strengths (i.e. their differential analytical or memory-driven capacities) to extract, make sense of, retain and structure the relevant information to be learned. In contrast, most learners may beneﬁt from external help via explanations and guided practice, provided these are well designed. Or at least this may be true of literate adult learners who are used to formal language learning anyway. If this third line of reasoning were correct, then it would mean that in fact individual differences across (adult, highly literate) learners emerge more strongly under implicit than under explicit learning conditions.
The empirical evidence regarding this problem is mixed. There is no ﬁrm pattern in favour of aptitude mattering more in implicit or explicit conditions consistently. Some studies have shown effects in relation to implicit learning (J. N. Williams, 1999). Of the studies that directly compared an implicit and an explicit condition, some have found that aptitude mattered across the board (de Graaff, 1997), while in others individual differences across learners emerged more strongly under implicit than under explicit learning conditions (Nation and McLaughlin, 1986). Robinson’s research programme in this area has yielded mixed evidence as well, in that comparisons of three or four types of learning conditions have yielded effects for aptitude that are not always consistent with the theoretical predictions he had put forth (for example, Robinson, 1997 versus 2005b).
 

Classroom investigations of this issue are rare, but have begun to appear. Rosemary Erlam (2005) examined whether aptitude scores on three different dimensions (analytical ability, phonemic coding and working memory) would correlate with the amount of learning accrued from three different instructional approaches (traditional explicit grammar teaching and practice, collaborative consciousness-raising inductive rule discovery, and explicit explanation plus meaningful comprehension practice only), all focusing on French direct object pronouns and all delivered via three 45-minute lessons. The participants were 14- year-old students of French at a high school in New Zealand, and the aptitude measures were administered retrospectively, six months after the instructional treatments were delivered. She found several signiﬁcant correlations between analytical ability (measured by the Words in Sentences subtest of the MLAT, see Table 7.1) and working memory and better performance on the written delayed post-tests among the participants who received either the inductive or the comprehension-only practice instructional treatments, but no noteworthy correlations between any of the aptitude measures and the learning exhibited by the participants in the explicit instructional treatment. Erlam interprets this evidence as suggestive of a levelling off of aptitude-treatment interactions for explicit instruction, which seem to beneﬁt learners regardless of their aptitude proﬁles and strengths. However, Younghee Sheen (2007) obtained a dissimilar pattern of results, when she provided error correction on the English article to learners in six intact classrooms at a community college in the United States, who were asked to read and then retell in writing two stories. She found a stronger relationship between aptitude measures and gains on immediate and delayed post-tests among participants who had received metalinguistic corrections on their article usage in the story than among those who has received similarly explicit corrections but without metalinguistic explanations.
In the end, then, before the interaction between L2 aptitude and learning conditions can be understood, we will need more studies involving comparisons of short- versus long-lasting explicit and implicit treatments. It will be also important to employ different paradigms, triangulating the artiﬁcial and semi-artiﬁcial language paradigms favoured to date with more classroom studies, such as those by Erlam and Sheen. The latter line of research, in particular, can shed light on the ecological conditions under which aptitude makes different instructional approaches more or less successful or appropriate, thus helping advance knowledge for how to orchestrate successful aptitude-treatment interactions, as we will discuss in section 7.12.

7.11	MOST RECENT DEVELOPMENTS: MULTIDIMENSIONAL APTITUDE       

In a widely read collection on individual differences published in 2002, Peter Robinson and Peter Skehan, the two SLA researchers that have probably contributed the most to recent theorizing of aptitude, each offered new directions for future foreign language aptitude research. Robinson (2002) builds on the seminal work of the late educational psychologist Richard Snow and proposes what he calls the Aptitude Complex Hypothesis. In Snow’s work, three principles are highlighted: (a) human aptitude is made up of a complex of abilities, interrelated in a hierarchical fashion rather than a simple or direct fashion; (b) differential cognitive processing abilities are intertwined with the contexts and affordances of the environment; and (c) differential aptitude cannot be fully explained unless motivational and affective inﬂuences are taken into account as well (see Ackerman, 2003, for a good overview of Snow’s work in this area). Robinson (2002, 2005a) capitalizes on these three premises, emphasizing the ﬁrst two: ‘abilities … have their effects in combination of “complexes” … which jointly facilitate processing and learning in a speciﬁc instructional context’ (Robinson, 2005a, p. 51). He then applies them to L2 learning issues speciﬁcally.
To illustrate, let us assume that different learners are better or worse at learning from recasts (see Chapter 4, section 4.11). How would Robinson set out to explain this aptitude difference? Regarding Snow’s ﬁrst premise, two aptitude complexes would be involved in explaining speciﬁcally why some learners are better than others at beneﬁting from recasts: ‘noticing the gap’ when the learner compares their own utterance to the one they heard back from the interlocutor and ‘memory for contingent speech’ when the learner actually remembers the utterance offered by the interlocutor well enough to rehearse it in memory or to recognize it later on, when it occurs again. In turn, each of the two complexes would be made up of a number of more basic cognitive abilities. The complex to ‘notice the gap’ probably involves pattern recognition and processing speed, whereas the complex of ‘memory for contingent speech’ would involve phonological working memory. There is some initial evidence that this latter basic cognitive ability is important for recasts in a study conducted by Jenefer Philp (2003), which showed that longer recasts (deﬁned as strings with more than ﬁve morphemes) were repeated back less accurately than shorter recasts by most learners. That being so, learners with better phonological working memory will be less limited by recast length. This may be true at least of highly literate learners, since learners whose literacy skills are low (because they come from predominantly oral language backgrounds) may be less affected by length constraints and therefore less amenable to working memory differences, as Bigelow et al. (2006) suggested in a replication of Philp’s study. It may even be that in the study by Mackey et al. (2002) (mentioned in section 7.8) weaker ‘memory for contingent speech’ may have worked against the low-memory students being able to ‘hold on to data’ offered during the interactions (p. 204) and expand on their initial gains on the immediate post-test over two weeks, like the high-memory students did. However, they may not have necessarily been weaker in their ability to ‘notice the gap,’ since they were able to show they beneﬁted from recasts on the immediate test.
The second premise relates to the speciﬁc instructional context, and in this case would include the range of contextual considerations we discussed in section 4.11 about how explicit or implicit recasts are delivered by teachers in a given setting and even during a given part of a lesson, with various balances of communication and attention to the code. In agreement with Snow’s third premise, Robinson (2005a) recognizes that motivational and affective forces will also inﬂuence how well the hierarchical web of basic cognitive abilities and aptitude complexes is put to use under real-world conditions. One may suspect, for example, that the beneﬁts of recasts may be reaped more easily by individuals who are highly motivated (see Chapter 8) because they may take every encounter in the L2 as an opportunity for learning; or for individuals who score high on personality traits such as openness to experience or extraversion (see Chapter 9), because they might be more attuned to positive and negative evidence that is delivered via interpersonal communication. Clearly, in order to take this third dimension of the theory to its full consequences, in future studies researchers of L2 aptitude will need to more vigorously incorporate conative and affective variables of the kinds we will examine in Chapters 8 and 9.
Skehan (2002) proposes a different but largely compatible model of aptitude for future consideration. His main concern is with linking aptitude components to the processes that SLA theory tells us are involved in L2 grammar learning. Skehan chooses to work with information processing theory (see Chapter 5, section 5.1) and identiﬁes noticing, patterning, controlling and lexicalizing as the four macro- processes involved in learning any new aspect of the L2. Because during noticing attention is placed on a to-be-learned aspect of the L2, Skehan reasons the kinds of aptitude components that may matter for differential noticing advantages include things like attention management, working memory and phonemic coding ability. During patterning, hypotheses about what has been noticed are implicitly or explicitly made, tried out, revised, extended to relevant cases and eventually a ﬁnal resulting generalization (that is, a new ‘rule’) is integrated into the existing knowledge of the L2, which thereby undergoes restructuring. The aptitude components involved in doing this patterning less or more successfully probably include grammatical sensitivity and inductive language learning ability. The next learning process is controlling. Since this involves effortful attempts to use the newly noticed and patterned knowledge to levels that are accurate, Skehan proposes that differential retrieval and proceduralization abilities must underlie aptitude differences in this area. Finally, lexicalization (also called chunking and dual coding) is the process of making the now acquired new aspect of the L2 into a ﬂuent and automatic commodity that can be retrieved for use via a memory representation as much as via the application of a rule (lexicalization is related to our discussion in Chapter 6, section 6.4). Therefore, individuals who are adept at cognitive processes such as memory and chunking are likely to have aptitude strengths in the lexicalization stage of L2 learning. The resulting picture is one suggestive of aptitude complexes and proﬁles, as with Robinson (2002).

7.12	PLAYING IT TO ONE’S STRENGTHS: THE FUTURE OF L2 APTITUDE?   

A tantalizing possibility that stems from these recent proposals formulated by Robinson (2002) and Skehan (2002) is that instruction that plays to the strengths and preferences of certain proﬁles in students will bring about the most learning for them. This is an old hope in educational psychology investigated in what is known as aptitude-treatment interactions research. Can language instruction be matched so as to play it to the relative strengths of different L2 aptitude proﬁles?
Wesche (1981) evaluated this question by looking at ‘streaming’ practices for Canadian public servants who have to learn French for their job. As a regular practice during the 1970s, they would be placed on the basis of their MLAT scores into types of course that best matched their aptitudinal strengths. Thus, French was taught audiovisually as an option. Since audiolingualism/audiovisualism as a method involves mostly aural and visual input and quick repetition and expansion drills, students had to score at a certain high level on the phonetic coding ability parts of the MLAT (cf. Table 7.1) in order to be placed into such courses. Another instructional option was analytical teaching. The course enrolled students who had a certain high score on the grammatical sensitivity part of the MLAT (the Words in Sentences; see Table 7.1) and seemed to enjoy and be good at what we would call traditional grammar explanation and practice. In 1975 a group of students who exhibited a proﬁle most apt for analytical instruction were either matched into an analytical class or mismatched into an audiovisual class. After three months of six daily hours of instruction, the matched students scored statistically signiﬁcantly higher on three of four achievement tests. In other words, the streaming seemed to be an effective practice in bringing the best out of each individual’s strengths with language, whereas the aptitude-treatment mismatch appeared to put students at a disadvantage.
The old question of whether L2 aptitude can be proﬁled and then matched with responsive instructional approaches has great value but is difﬁcult to investigate. The aptitude proﬁles that Skehan (2002) and Robinson (2002) have put forth have the advantage of making predictions of aptitude-treatment interactions much more amenable to empirical investigation, because they unpack the early suggestions of aptitude proﬁles, which were mostly binary ones (i.e. memory-based and analytical proﬁles), into more theoretically viable and speciﬁcally researchable terms. For example, Robinson’s (2002) model makes it possible to postulate that an L2 learner is high on some basic abilities and low on others (HL), or high on all (HH) or low on all (LL), thus making up for a range of strong, weak or mixed ability on each of sev- eral aptitude complexes. Likewise, it follows from Skehan’s (2002) model that some people may be very good at one or more of the processing stages of learning (e.g. noticing or lexicalizing) but average or poor at the remaining ones (e.g. patterning or controlling). In other words, both models allow for mixed proﬁles and both point at the potential to diagnose speciﬁc areas where individuals will need external help (and can beneﬁt from it) in order to boost their L2 learning success.
