MOTIVATION


In Chapter 7 we examined aptitude, a construct that is comprised of many cognitive abilities and helps explain why people differ so greatly in how fast and how well they are likely to learn a second language. Contemporary psychologists working in the general area of human cognition agree that cognitive abilities alone cannot tell the whole story of individual differences. Since humans are conscious and volitional creatures, in explaining perception, behaviour and learning we also need to account for human intentions, goals, plans and commitments. These are conative inﬂuences that at the broadest level include volition and motivation, and they can make language learners succeed or fail. In this chapter we turn to the best researched L2 factor in the general area of conation, foreign language motivation. As you will see, SLA work on motivation draws heavily on theories and methods from social psychology. The speciﬁc case of additional language learning requires that motivation be conceptualized as a complex set of constructs that subsume social–psychological perceptions and attitudes.

8.1	THE TRADITIONAL APPROACH: THE AMTB AND MOTIVATIONAL QUANTITY	

Motivation is usually understood to refer to the desire to initiate L2 learning and the effort employed to sustain it, and in lay terms we all understand it to be a matter of quantity, as in the everyday observation that some learners are highly motivated and others have little or no motivation. In the late 1950s, Canadian researchers Robert Gardner and Wallace Lambert developed what would become the dominant model of L2 learning motivation, which they framed within a wider model of foreign language learning known as the socio-educational model (Gardner and Lambert, 1972; Gardner, 1985). Over four decades, Gardner and associates furthered their deﬁnition of motivation via large survey studies mostly carried out in Canada. However, in the 1990s the model underwent serious criticisms for being too restrictive and unresponsive to wider developments in psychology (e.g. Crookes and Schmidt, 1991; Dörnyei, 1994; Oxford and Shearin, 1994).
Most of the studies used the same instrument, the Attitude/Motivation Test Battery (AMTB; Gardner, 1985). Therefore, all illustrations in this section and the following ones come from items in the AMTB, unless differently indicated. In the
 
dimensions, each reﬂected in a separate scale in the AMTB:

●	Motivational intensity, which we can explain as how much effort people reportedly expend in learning the language (as in ‘I keep up to date with
 

French by working on it almost every day’ and ‘I don’t pay much attention to the feedback I receive in my French class’).
●	Attitudes towards learning the L2, which we can see as probing how much enjoyment people report feeling when they learn the language (as in ‘I love learning French’ and ‘I hate French’).
●	Desire to learn, which can be generally understood as how much personal investment in succeeding in the language people claim for themselves (as in ‘I want to learn French so well that it will become second nature to me’ and ‘To be honest, I really have little desire to learn French’).

For any given statement, what is known as a Likert scale (Likert, 1932) is offered and respondents choose on a seven-point continuum from ‘strongly agree’ (which gets scored as a seven) to ‘strongly disagree’ (which gets scored as a one). The three scales above contain each ten statements and the scores derived from them contribute to a single, strict quantiﬁcation of motivation. The ‘truly motivated individual’ scores high on all three dimensions, according to Gardner (2001, p. 6). In order to appreciate more concretely the signiﬁcance of these three dimensions, let us return to the comparison of Richard Watson and Alice Kaplan that we initiated in Chapter 7 (see section 7.2). Table 8.1 shows excerpts comparing the two French learners on the three dimensions of effort, enjoyment and investment. It would seem as if enjoyment is where the only difference between the two learners lies. It is on this dimension only that Watson would be rated extremely low (to the point of aversion!), whereas Kaplan would be rated extremely high. If we accept Gardner’s stipulation of what constitutes a ‘truly motivated individual’, then Kaplan, but not Watson, is truly motivated – and, indeed, she learns French more successfully.

8.2	INTEGRATIVENESS AS AN ANTECEDENT OF MOTIVATION	

A goal of early motivation research was to be able to reliably measure the amount of motivation an individual will feel towards learning the L2 and to determine whether this measured quantity can predict a reasonable proportion of his or her L2 achieve- ment level. Equally or more important in understanding language learning motiva- tion, however, is to explain what variables contribute to increases or decreases in motivational quantity. In motivation jargon, these variables are called antecedents or ‘motivational substrates’ that give form to the structure of motivation.
Of all antecedents, integrativeness is the one that has played the most central role in the development of a theory of foreign language motivation. Unfortunately, this construct has also often misinterpreted (see discussion in Dörnyei, 2005, p. 69) and since the 1990s has attracted harsh criticism, to the point that most contemporary scholars of L2 motivation have turned their backs to the construct. According to Gardner (2001), integrativeness is an attitude deﬁned as ‘a genuine interest in learning the second language in order to come closer to the other language community’ (p. 5). It involves three dimensions:
 

●	Favourable attitudes towards L2 speakers (‘if Canada should lose the French culture of Quebec, it would indeed be a great loss’).
●	General interest in foreign languages and low ethnocentricism (‘I would really like to learn a lot of foreign languages’).
●	Endorsement of reasons for learning the L2 related to interaction with L2 members or, in Gardner’s terms, an integrative orientation (‘studying French is important to me because it will allow me to meet and converse with more and varied people’; we will examine this and other orientations in section 8.3).

For learners who score very high on integrativeness (i.e. on the three dimensions above combined), complete identiﬁcation with the L2 community may be observed. For example, learners may express desires to think and behave like a person from the L2 community, at times to the point of detachment from the L1 community. Some signs of this extreme case of integrativeness can indeed be found in Kaplan’s (1993) account, when she writes: ‘Why do people want to adopt another culture? Because there’s something in their own they don’t like, that doesn’t name them’ (p. 209, italics in the original).
Gardner (2001) believed the highest and most facilitative form of motivation is what he called the integrative motivation, which is attained only when three conditions are met: (1) the antecedent of integrativeness itself is high, (2) motivation quantity (that is, the combined amount of effort, enjoyment, and investment) is also high, and (3) attitudes towards the learning situation (teachers, curriculum) are positive. Indeed, Gardner (2001) asserted that exceptionally successful learners who attain native-like competence are likely to be integratively motivated individuals. This is something that is anecdotally supported in Kaplan’s case but has never been systematically studied in the exceptional adult learner studies of the kind illustrated in Table 2.3 in Chapter 2. In any case, in the sociocultural model integrative motivation evolved to signify the epitome of optimal and highest motivation.
As we will see later in this chapter, the emphasis on identiﬁcation with the other language community as a precondition for optimal L2 learning motivation eventually attracted criticisms for being too narrow. In addition, the disregard for contexts for language learning other than Canada limits the usefulness of Gardner’s notion of integrativeness and of the socio-educational model in general. Thus, since the mid-1990s the construct of integrativeness has undergone tremendous conceptual renovation as part of an effort to make it more researchable as well as more applicable across L2 learning contexts (Csizér and Dörnyei, 2005b).

8.3	OTHER ANTECEDENTS:  ORIENTATIONS AND ATTITUDES	

Table 8.2 presents a synopsis of most antecedents of motivation that have been identiﬁed over the years. They comprise at a minimum three central ones: integrativeness (which we just examined in section 8.2), orientations (that is, reasons for learning the L2) and attitudes (both towards the L2 community and its speakers and towards teachers and curriculum in the instructional setting). The affective variables of foreign language anxiety and communicative self-conﬁdence are also considered key in predicting motivation, but we will examine them separately when we look at affective sources of individual differences in Chapter 9 (see particularly sections 9.3 and 9.4).
Orientation refers to reasons for learning the L2, because they contribute to the setting of goals that will propel and sustain motivation of varying intensities and qualities. Of course, reasons are not antithetical or mutually exclusive, and therefore a given individual may exhibit several orientations at once. There are ﬁve orientations for learning a language that L2 learners most commonly report across contexts:

●	instrumental when pragmatic and utilitarian reasons are important, such as getting a better job or pursuing a higher level of education in the L2
●	for knowledge or enlightened understanding of one’s own identity, language or culture and to become a more knowledgeable person
●	to facilitate travel to other countries or parts of a country
●	for fostering general friendship with members of the target language
●	for integrative reasons related to identiﬁcation with the target culture and a genuine desire to become more like members of the L2 group (as a reminder, in the socio-educational model this integrative orientation is only one of three components of integrativeness, which in turn is only one of several components of the integrative motivation; see section 8.2).

In an inﬂuential study, Clément and Kruidenier (1983) added several other important reasons for learning the L2 that contribute to shaping motivation beyond these ﬁve. Even more importantly, they showed that orientations for L2 learning are not context free but arise from forces related to ‘who learns what in what milieu’ (p. 288). For example, they found that in their sample of 871 grade 11 students, Canadian Anglophones, who can be considered to be members of the linguistic majority in Canada, often reported learning a minority language like French or Spanish because they sought the prestige and respect they felt they stood to gain by attaining familiarity with those increasingly important minority groups (a dominance-recognition orientation, as in ‘It will permit me to become an inﬂuential member of my community’), or to maintain control over the wealth and inﬂuence they enjoy as a dominant group (a pragmatic control orientation, as in ‘It will allow me to gain inﬂuence over French Canadians’). By way of contrast, Clément and Kruidenier also found that genuine integrative motives can indeed thrive among individuals from the dominant group who may have a familiarity- involvement orientation and want to learn the language for reasons that include empathy and desire to become familiar with the other (as in ‘It will help me to appreciate the problems that French people have in a predominantly English- speaking country’) or even to become an involved participant in the other’s community and fulﬁl a true integrative identiﬁcation in Gardner’s sense (as in ‘I want to become a member of the French Canadian community’). These researchers also found evidence, however, that this familiarity-involvement orientation is more common in dominant-group individuals who live in multilingual settings and who therefore meet two conditions: they ‘are assured of their ﬁrst language and culture and have immediate access to the target language group’ (1983, p. 287). In unilingual settings, by contrast, where contact with L2 members is not frequent, the researchers found that an interest may emerge in the culture of the L2 group as an object of distant study and celebration (a sociocultural or what we could also call a belletristic orientation, as in ‘It will enable me to better understand and appreciate French Canadian art and literature’).
In addition to the reasons that cause people to want to learn an L2, attitudes towards the L2 and its speakers will contribute to increased or diminished L2 motivation. These attitudes come from the collective values, beliefs, attitudes and even behaviours that are rewarded and modelled for the learner in the communities in which he or she participates, be it a classroom, the family or the wider environment of neighbourhoods and institutions. These inﬂuences constitute what social psychologists call the sociocultural milieu. Several attitudes grounded in the sociocultural milieu have been investigated over the years in the SLA literature on individual differences (see Table 8.2).
Gardner et al. (1999) investigated the relationship between motivation and attitudes in a sample of 109 undergraduate students enrolled in an English- speaking university in Canada who had taken at least one year of high-school French in the past. The respondents were asked to react to ﬁve scales with items that were worded to prompt their recollections of feelings and attitudes back when they were taking French in high school. For example, items included ‘I really looked forward to the time I spent in French class’ and ‘My parents stressed the importance French would have for me when I left school’. Another number of scales probed their motivation, not during high school, but at the time the study was conducted (e.g. ‘I wish I were ﬂuent in French’) as well as their attitudes towards bilingualism (e.g. ‘Both English and French are important to Canada’), and their self-evaluation of communicative competence (rating their estimated difﬁculty to use the four language skills across situations like ‘ordering a simple meal in a restaurant’ or ‘understanding newspaper headlines’). Also completed by all students was a matched-guise task, a technique commonly used by sociolinguists to study language attitudes and stereotypes. In this task, the participants had to choose evaluative adjectives (insincere–sincere, impolite–polite, and so on) best describing each speaker whose voice they heard in six recordings (three in English, the students’ L1; and three in French, the students’ L2), blind to the fact that the same three bilingual individuals had produced each pair.
The ﬁndings of this study revealed that attitudes back in high school were directly associated with current motivation, with integrativeness, and (to a lesser extent) with French anxiety during college. Gardner et al. (1999) also found indirect associations between past high-school attitudes and current attitudes towards bilingualism and self-perceptions of communicative competence. The ﬁndings supported the theoretical relationships posited in the socioeducational model and led Gardner et al. (1999) to conclude that past experiences and attitudes that emerge in a given sociocultural milieu play a causal role in shaping L2 learning motivation.

8.4	FIRST SIGNS OF RENEWAL: SELF-DETERMINATION THEORY AND INTRINSIC MOTIVATION	

If the ﬁrst renaissance of L2 motivation research took place in the 1960s with the consolidation of the socio-educational model, a second burgeoning period began in the mid-1990s after three well-known critical reviews by Crookes and Schmidt (1991), Dörnyei (1994) and Oxford and Shearin (1994) summoned L2 motivation scholars to search for theoretical renewal. The more contemporary motivation research generated since those critiques has distanced itself from the emphasis on quantity of motivation and the antecedent of integrativeness, and instead has turned to an exploration of various qualities of motivation. Another reason for dissatisfaction was that, despite the inclusion of both social milieu and instructional context in the motivation theory of Gardner and colleagues, their interest in the Canadian context led them to emphasize attitudes rooted in the social milieu at the expense of the impact that the micro-context of the classroom environment (e.g. teacher, curriculum, instructional quality) can play in boosting or depleting motivation to learn an additional language. Many of these shortcomings were addressed in explorations of language learning motivation from the vantage point of self-determination theory, an inﬂuential ‘macro-theory’ of human motivation developed in the late 1970s by Edward Deci and Richard Ryan, both psychologists and the University of Rochester in the United States. This framework takes the lens away from motivational quantity and on to the nature and quality of L2 learning motivation, while it also accommodates important sources of motivational inﬂuence that stem from the instructional micro-context of the classroom.
As Vansteenkiste et al. (2006) explain, self-determination theory construes humans as volitional beings who are growth-oriented, that is, predisposed to life- long learning and development. Essential in meeting a few basic fundamental human needs is a sense of choice and personal causation in everything we humans do. Thus, human behaviour in this theory is posited to be guided by the drive to self-determine our actions and activities. A few years ago, Canadian researchers Richard Clément and Kimberly Noels took it upon themselves to apply the theory to the study of L2 motivation and to compare it with the Gardnerian model, to which both have also contributed much important work over the years. To this end, they teamed up with Canadian self-determination experts Robert Vallerand and Luc Pelletier and developed an instrument to measure the constructs of self- determination theory, the Language Learning Orientation Scale (LLOS; Noels et al., 2000). In what follows, I draw from LLOS items in order to illustrate the model and its constructs.
When individuals engage in behaviour that they understand as self-initiated by choice and largely sustained by inherent enjoyment in the activity (that is, as an end in itself, for the sheer sake of learning), they are said to be intrinsically motivated. This quality of motivation is considered optimal because it has been experimentally shown to be consistently associated to higher levels of achievement (Vansteenkiste et al., 2006). An L2 learner would be intrinsically motivated, according to the LLOS, if she said she studied the L2 for the ‘high’ she feels when hearing/speaking the foreign language (stimulation), for the pleasure of ‘surpassing oneself’ and ‘grasping a difﬁcult language concept’ (self-accomplishment), or for the sheer satisfaction to know more (knowledge). Note that the characteristic feature in all three cases is enjoyment. If you now reread the quotes pertaining to enjoyment from our French learners shown in Table 8.1, you will appreciate just how intrinsically motivated Kaplan is ... and the extent to which Watson is not!
Naturally, choice and personal causation cannot always be possible. For example, threats or even simply controlling language, rewards, deadlines, surveillance and exams can divest people from a sense of choice and take the pleasure away from almost any activity (Vansteenkiste et al., 2006). When individuals construe their behaviour as structured by a means–end, pragmatic–instrumental causation that is imposed from the outside, their sense of self-causation and autonomy is low, if present at all, and they are said to be extrinsically motivated. This is a less ideal quality of motivation that is associated with externally regulated actions. Learners who are extrinsically motivated may say, for example, that they are learning the L2 for ulterior goals that have little to do with the L2 itself, such as a better salary, a more prestigious job, or simply because it is expected of them (all three possibilities comprise the three-item scale for external regulation in the LLOS).
However, this simple binary picture is further complicated by the human desire to feel we belong to a community, that is, to feel relatedness. Because of the need for relatedness, certain external values, beliefs and behaviours may be gradually adopted and internalized, thus allowing individuals to function more successfully. Extrinsic regulation, then, can undergo a process of internalization, resulting in two intermediate states between absolute external regulation and complete self-regula- tion. Introjected regulation happens when people ‘buy into’ the external pressure, by developing feelings of guilt or shame that then can only be avoided via compli- ance with the expected behaviour (as in ‘I would feel ashamed if I couldn’t speak to my friends from the second language community in their native tongue’). It would seem as if this was the case with Watson, whose intense desire to learn the L2 at a later point in his career was rooted in ‘years of guilt and embarrassment at being a Cartesian scholar who could not speak French’ (1995, p. 65). Identiﬁed regulation, by the same token, is closer to the intrinsic pole. It happens when external values are accepted and adopted as one’s own and an individual comes to see the relevance and meaningfulness of an activity that in principle was not self-determined. In the LLOS instrument, for example, an item tapping identiﬁed regulation is ‘I choose to be the kind of person who can speak more than one language’.
 

Finally, in extreme dysfunctional cases, individuals may fail to see any internal or external value to their actions. This happens, for example, when some students in compulsory foreign language courses say they do not know why they are studying the L2 or they express resentment at what feels like a waste of their time. These learners suffer from amotivation, and their performance in formal learning settings is predicted to suffer from it too.
Noels and her colleagues have found robust empirical support for self- determination principles in L2 motivation. For example, in a surveyed sample of 159 psychology volunteers who were enrolled at the University of Ottawa (a French–English bilingual institution) and had studied L2 French for varying periods ranging from as little as a few months up to as long as 34 years, Noels et al. (2000) found that freedom of choice (‘I experience a lot of freedom in learning a second language’) and intention to continue (‘I want to continue to learn a second language’) were clearly associated to each other as well as positively associated to the most self-regulated forms of motivation (intrinsic and identiﬁed) and negatively associated to amotivation. Three reasons for learning the L2 (for travel, friendship or knowledge) were associated to the two most self-regulated motivational types as well, whereas instrumental reasons (e.g. a better job) patterned very strongly with extrinsic motivation.
In several other studies, Noels and her colleagues have found further convergent validity for self-determination theory in that instructional environments that are perceived to be controlling and thwarting self-regulation and autonomy erode levels of intrinsic motivation. Speciﬁcally, students who perceived their teachers to be controlling showed noticeably less intrinsic motivation (e.g. Noels et al., 1999; Noels, 2001). This ﬁnding is fully predicted by self-determination theory and has indeed been consistently observed in other non-language academic subject matters (see Vansteenkiste et al., 2006). As you can see, evidence yielded by L2 research on the self-regulation model of motivation is not only theoretically promising but potentially useful to language teachers as well. Or at least this should be true of Western education contexts such as Canada, the United States and Europe, where autonomy and independence are valued by many students and teachers and is generally rewarded by the social and educational milieux.
How does intrinsic motivation in self-determination theory relate to integrative motivation, the optimal type of motivation posited by Gardner? Noels (2001) set out to investigate precisely this question, by measuring the correlational strength between integrative orientation (which, you should remember, is only one of the three dimensions that make up the antecedent of integrativeness in the socio- educational model) and the intrinsic–extrinsic continuum of motivation proposed by self-determination theory. She examined the answers to a battery of questionnaires administered to a sample of 322 L1 English students who were enrolled in L2 Spanish courses at a university in California and had studied the L2 for no time at all and up to 38 years. She concluded that integrative and intrinsic motivation were reciprocally related in the California sample: ‘the more individuals wish to learn a language because it is interesting and enjoyable, and because the activity has value to them personally, the more they are likely to learn the language because they wish to have interactions with members’ of the L2 community (p. 137). On the other hand, only integrative orientation, but not intrinsic motivation, helped explain inter-group dimensions of motivation, such as frequency of contact with L2 speakers, in this Spanish sample.
Thus, while pointing out that a strength of the self-determination model of L2 motivation is its focus on broad human motives underlying motivational states, Noels (2001, p. 114) also recognized that a weakness is that it lacks the theoretical apparatus to accommodate societal attitudes towards the L2 and its speakers, the inﬂuence of the sociocultural milieu, and issues of ethnic vitality and identiﬁcation. In these L2-speciﬁc areas the socio-educational model continues to provide important insights for understanding L2 motivation.
So far the theories and studies introduced in this chapter engage with the learning of languages that are widely salient and present in North American contexts, such as English, French and Spanish. We may want to ask ourselves: Just how useful is this knowledge, if we want to understand L2 motivation beyond those few contexts? Hungarian researcher Zoltán Dörnyei was among the ﬁrst SLA scholars to suggest that motivation research as the ﬁeld of SLA knew it since the 1960s probably needed modiﬁcation if it was to explain L2 motivation beyond the Canadian context where most studies had been conducted. In doing so, he unchained a profound series of explorations for renewal and innovation that have provided the foundations for contemporary and future understandings of language learning motivation.

8.5	MOTIVATION FROM A DISTANCE: EFL LEARNERS’ ORIENTATIONS AND ATTITUDES	

Dörnyei’s critique began in 1988 with his dissertation research, completed at Eotvös University in Budapest, and has been sustained ever since through a systematic research programme at the University of Nottingham (see Dörnyei, 2001). His main concern initially was with probing the explanatory power of the main antecedents that the socio-educational model had identiﬁed as the bedrock of L2 motivation (that is, orientations and attitudes). Speciﬁcally, he suggested that integrativeness might have less explanatory power for learners in foreign language contexts, such as his native Hungary, because they rarely come into personal contact with L2 members. Without contact, they cannot form strong attitudes towards L2 speakers or harbour intense desires of integrating or being ‘like them’. He reasoned that, at least in the beginning stages of L2 learning, instrumental types of orientation (wanting a good grade, passing university entrance exams, and so on) and classroom attitudes (towards the teacher, curriculum, materials, and so on) may inﬂuence the motivation of foreign language learners more heavily.
Other researchers have joined since then in these efforts to reconceptualize the antecedents of motivation so as to make L2 motivation models more relevant to foreign language contexts. Particularly, motivation in EFL contexts has attracted considerable attention in recent years.
For one, orientations (i.e. the reasons for learning an L2) can be quite different in foreign as opposed to second language contexts. Clément et al. (1994) investigated orientations in a sample of 301 17- and 18-year-old Hungarian students learning English. They discovered that the orientations reported in previous Canadian studies required a few interesting modiﬁcations. First, the friendship and travel orientations were blended, probably because the main means for making friends with foreigners in a context like Hungary is when travelling abroad. Furthermore, because the desire to make friends was expressed with regard to foreigners in general, rather than speciﬁcally with members of the L2 group, the term xenophilic orientation was suggested as more appropriate in such cases than a ‘friendship’ orientation. Third, the instrumental and knowledge orientations were also intertwined, and the researchers suggest this is because in the context of post- communist Hungary ‘being more educated and knowledgeable [in English] is related to success in work and studies’ (p. 431) and thus ‘English as knowledge is perceived to have pragmatic consequences’ (p. 432). Finally, Clément et al. discovered a new orientation, the English media orientation, which refers to learning English to watch TV and listen to music, above all. This media orientation has been more recently renamed as indirect contact (Csizér and Dörnyei, 2005b) or cultural interest orientation (Csizér and Dörnyei, 2005a) because it broadly ‘reﬂects the appreciation of cultural products associated with the particular L2 and conveyed by the media [and] ... cultural products and artifacts’ (Csizér and Dörnyei, 2005a, p. 21). It is related to the special status of English as a world language that evokes positive as well as negative symbolic images of globalization and economic prowess. Clément and his associates summarize the orientations that are likely to be important in EFL contexts like Hungary in the following manner:

The absence of Anglophones from the immediate environment would appear to sustain distal friendships (through travel), an interest in English culture as a foreign phenomenon, and an instrumental orientation based on the acquisition of knowledge and media usage rather than on achievement of pragmatic outcomes.
(1994, pp. 433–4)

Not only orientations but also attitudes towards the L2 and its speakers may be quite different when characterizing motivation in EFL learning contexts. Japanese researcher Tomoko Yashima and her colleagues (Yashima et al., 2004) proposed the notion of international posture, a positive international attitude made up of at least three dimensions successfully measured by this research team:

●	interest in international vocation or activities (‘I want to work in an international organization such as the United Nations’)
●	tendency to approach rather than avoid dissimilar others, such as non- Japanese in Japan (‘I would share an apartment with international students’)
●	interest in foreign affairs (‘I often talk about situations and events in foreign countries with my family and/or friends’).
 
It is interesting to note that the construct of international posture resonates with one of Gardner’s three conditions that support integrativeness in general, namely openness to other groups or lack of ethnocentricism (see section 8.2). Yashima and colleagues were able to establish strong associations between international posture and L2 learning motivation in two studies with college and high-school samples of Japanese EFL students (n = 297 and 160, respectively; see Yashima et al., 2004).
Lamb (2004) also uncovered support for a shared set of orientations and attitudes that characterize EFL learning in a sample of 219 11- and 12-year-old students in a very different context, an elite junior high school in Sumatra, Indonesia. These young adolescents had exposure to English mostly through TV and music and rarely through direct contact with any English speakers, a pattern which is consistent with the English media or cultural interest orientation discovered by Clément et al. (1994). They also appeared to hold a xenophilic orientation, in the terms of Clément et al., as they envisioned needs and desires for L2 communication with regard to ‘foreigners’ and ‘foreign countries’ in general rather than with respect to particular target groups and cultures. In close connection with Yashima’s notion of international posture, Lamb uncovered clear evidence that these students had been exposed to the collective discourse of globalization through media, school and family and they viewed English as a resource of ‘citizens of the world’. He argues that this international predisposition also involved an identiﬁcation process that nurtured ‘a vision of an English- speaking, globally-involved but nationally-responsible future self’ (2004, p. 16).
Whether methodologies are quantitative as in Clément et el. (1994) and Yashima et al. (2004) or qualitative as in Lamb (2004), and whether the so-called foreign language contexts are countries as different as Hungary, Japan or Indonesia, the similarity of ﬁndings and themes is clear. It would be naive, however, to imagine that a positive international attitude is all there is to EFL learners’ motivation towards learning English as an international language and the language of globalization. For example, in the largest scale motivation study to date, Dörnyei and Csizér (2005; see also Dörnyei et al., 2006) investigated attitudes towards ﬁve L2s (including English and German, the most studied in that context) among more than 8,500 13- and 14-year-olds studying foreign languages in schools in Hungary. Their ﬁndings suggest that respondents who were residents of regions with relatively small volumes of tourism but reported high frequency of personal encounters turned out to exhibit the most positive attitudes. By contrast, respondents who resided in top touristic areas (e.g. Budapest) and reported similar frequency of contact entertained more negative attitudes than the former group. Dörnyei and Csizér speculate that at some point, if the presence of foreigners is very large in a particular foreign language setting, a deterioration in attitudes is observed, possibly because students of the target language come to entertain more realistic perceptions of the beneﬁts and drawbacks of tourism and globalization (for more on L2 contact, see also Chapter 9, section 9.5).
Taking a more critical perspective, Lamb (2004) also notes that some of the Indonesian students’ comments suggested ‘not so much [... a sense] of language learners reaching out to integrate with the foreign culture or community, but of knowing they must embrace the changes already sweeping their own culture’ (p. 13) and a sense of learned urgency to become functional English users in order ‘not to be pushed away’ (p. 11). Thus, some foreign language learners will develop positive attitudes towards the somewhat distant image of English speakers or even ‘foreigners’ in general and will entertain a positive international posture, but other learners may grow disappointed after sufﬁcient actual contact or they may contest such positive international attitudes and even subvert them, depending on complex and dynamic forces of identity formation that may change over the life span.

8.6	LANGUAGE LEARNING MOTIVATION: POSSIBLE IN SITUATIONS OF CONFLICT?	

Clément and Kruidenier’s (1983) dictum that motivation and the orientations that underlie it greatly depend on ‘who learns what in what milieu’ (p. 288) is highly relevant when applied to yet other contexts, particularly to settings where language learning happens despite the speakers of the target and the ﬁrst languages being directly in conﬂict. This is the case of the study of Arabic in Israel. Is high motivation for learning another language even possible when the context is characterized by serious conﬂict between the L1 and L2 group?
We have some good insights into this difﬁcult question thanks to a team of researchers at Tel Aviv University who investigated the motivation of Hebrew speaking school-aged children in Israel (Inbar et al., 2001; Donitsa-Schmidt et al., 2004). The researchers describe this national context in the following terms. The Hebrew speaking school population in Israel is required to study a foreign language besides English (that is, an L3) from grades seven through nine. In 70 per cent of the schools, students have no choice but to enroll in Modern Standard Arabic, either because no other alternative L3 is provided by the school or because for resource efﬁciency reasons the school randomly decides which students will be assigned to study Arabic or another language (typically French). By contrast, in 30 per cent of Israeli schools students do have a choice to enroll in either Arabic or French during these three compulsory years of an L3 in junior high school. In addition, during the mid-1990s the Tel Aviv Municipality initiated an experimental introduction of Spoken (as opposed to Modern Standard) Arabic in grade four, at age nine or three years earlier than is the national norm, in 65 per cent of the Jewish elementary schools in the city (that is, 38 schools).
Donitsa-Schmidt et al. (2004) studied a representative sample of 539 fourth-, ﬁfth- and sixth-graders in nine schools in Tel Aviv who had begun studying Spoken Arabic experimentally at age nine; these children’s attitudes and motivation were compared to those of a representative sample of 153 same-age students in ﬁve other schools who, following the national norm, would not begin studying Arabic until the seventh grade or age 12. When the researchers gave all these middle-school children the opportunity to provide open-ended comments about why the study of Spoken Arabic should be given priority as an L3 in schools in Israel, the most frequently mentioned reasons were:
 

(a) the Arabs surround us; (b) we need to communicate with the Arabs; (c) we need to learn about their culture and make peace with them; (d) it is instrumental for ﬁnding a job, university studies, watching TV, and so on; and
(e) we need to ﬁght the enemy.
(2004, p. 223)

Fortunately, the subset of 539 students who were already studying Spoken Arabic at the time answered the question by consistently emphasizing mostly reasons (c) and (d) above, when compared to the other students who would not begin learning Arabic until seventh grade. Speciﬁcally, they mentioned peace oriented (e.g. ‘to promote peace between Jews and Arabs’) and pragmatically oriented (e.g. ‘so I can become Prime Minister once I grow up’) reasons for the study of Arabic in Israel more frequently. The researchers also found that the youngsters who had begun studying Arabic at age nine thought more frequently this language was important to study in school. This patterned difference in opinions gives hope that actually studying a language can make people hold more positive orientations and attitudes towards both the L2 and its speakers, even in conﬂictual contexts.
In an earlier study Inbar et al. (2001) investigated the same population of Hebrew-speaking Israeli children, but this time focusing on older students (seventh-graders, or 12-year-olds) at the school juncture when the study of an L3 becomes obligatory for three years. A major focus in the 2001 study was whether having a choice to study Arabic or to opt for some other L3 would make a difference in motivation. The researchers found that it did not: The 12-year-old children who were studying Arabic had higher motivation and more positive attitudes towards the L2 and its speakers than students who were studying another language (French, typically), and this was true regardless of whether they had enrolled in Arabic or the other L3 voluntarily or forced by the institutional circumstances. As in the 2004 study, actually studying the language seemed to make the real positive difference, this time on motivational intensity in addition to attitude or orientation.
The ﬁndings of the 2004 and 2001 studies are largely in agreement with respect to most other areas investigated as well. First, for both the younger total sample of 692 students (in the 2004 study) and the older total sample of 1,690 students (in the 2001 study), factors that associated strongly with the likelihood of children being more motivated towards studying Arabic (at the time or in the future) were attitudes towards the L2, its speakers and its culture and also whether they perceived their parents to want them to study Arabic.
More disappointingly, in the 2001 sample there was no difference in motivation for the students who, within each group (with or without a choice), had enjoyed prior exposure to communicative instruction in the Spoken Arabic dialect in the fourth to sixth grade (at ages nine through 12) (that is, for students who had been enrolled in the early-start experimental programme investigated in the 2004 study). It appears, therefore, that the higher motivation and better attitudes documented for early starters in the 2004 study are not likely to grow exponentially with age, or at least in this sample they did not confer them any special motivational advantage later, when compared to late starters. The positive ﬁnding remains, however, that in this Israeli context what matters most, regardless of starting age or L3 choice, is the fact that children are actually exposed to Arabic in school. This ﬁrst-hand study of Arabic is what affects both their motivation and attitudes positively.
The single most important ﬁnding from the two Tel Aviv studies may have been that motivation was best predicted by student satisfaction with the quality of Arabic instruction. That is, among the students who were studying Arabic (539 9- to 11- year-olds in the 2004 study and 1,132 12-year-olds in the 2001 study), those who expressed more satisfaction towards their teacher and curriculum tended to be those who also reported higher motivation. It is a pity that the 2001 group who was currently studying French rather than Arabic in junior high were not asked about this issue, as it would be interesting to know if students place the same kind of importance on the quality of L2 instruction when learning a more politically ‘neutral’  language in a given context, such as French in Israel. Be that as it may, the researchers conclude that ‘learning a foreign language in a school context enhances students’ motivations towards the culture and the language being studied’ (Inbar et al., 2001, p. 307). That this was the case with young children studying a target language in a national milieu of social and political conﬂict is all the more hopeful and places tremendous responsibility on teachers and curriculum developers (Donitsa-Schmidt et al., 2004, pp. 226–7). Thus, as McGroarty (2001) also notes, this ﬁnding sheds an extremely hopeful light on the role that good language teachers can play in motivating their students.
These two studies also make it clear that new orientations need to be considered in situations of conﬂict between languages and speakers: a peace orientation and a conﬂict–dominance or national security orientation. Indeed, much of the post-9/11 public rhetoric in the United States in favour of learning certain (so-called critical) foreign languages has been dominated by the latter conﬂict–dominance orientation and driven by national security concerns (for a useful commentary on this issue, see Edwards, 2004). And yet, despite the largely positive ﬁndings reported by Inbar et al. (2001) and Donitsa-Schmidt et al. (2004), the reality of Arabic enrolments in the Israeli school system should give us little reason for optimism about long-term motivation for studying another language out of conﬂict–dominance-related orientations. Namely, the authors report that once students who take Arabic starting at age nine or 12 move on beyond grade nine and into high school, where English is the only requirement, Arabic enrolments suffer a serious dropout rate of 96 per cent! More in-depth study of the motivation of language learners across a larger variety of conﬂictual settings, and including not only orientations, attitudes and motivational intensity, but also behavioural evidence of actual long-term commitment and persistence to learn the L2, would make a real contribution to motivation theory as well as to promoting world peace.

8.7	DYNAMIC MOTIVATION: TIME, CONTEXT, BEHAVIOUR	

Since the turn of the new century, L2 motivation researchers have ventured into increasingly new territory and have begun exploring novel directions that may help us hone our understanding of motivation as a central source of individual differences in L2 learning. The times are now ripe for such changes, after the legacy accrued from four decades of systematic development, validation and critique of several previous models. These newer perspectives are related to an emphasis on the dynamic nature of L2 motivation and were fuelled by Dörnyei and Ottó (1998), who for the ﬁrst time argued that L2 motivation was mostly portrayed as static in the extant research, whereas in reality we all know that motivational changes over time are to be expected. They also warned that the dual focus on antecedents and ‘whys’ of L2 motivation, on the one hand, and on L2 achievement as the only criterion to establish that motivation mattered, on the other, meant that there was almost a complete disregard among L2 researchers for explicating the consequences of high or low motivation on actual behaviour. They therefore proposed the Process Model of L2 Motivation, which is partly based on Heckhausen and Kuhl’s (1985) Action Control theory, and conceived of motivation in relation to speciﬁc contexts, activities and situations. McGroarty (2001) characterizes well what this theoretical move is to mean for future L2 motivation research:

The motivational tenor of any classroom, including its constructive social relations, can probably only be gauged over time. It is likely that the motivational level of a social unit, whether an entire classroom or a small group or pair working within the class, waxes and wanes somewhat depending on both the variety of activities and tasks occurring … and on the social interactions framing the activity.
(2001, p. 86)

Now SLA researchers feel compelled to investigate L2 motivation not only as a generalized trait, but also as a state trait (as Gardner et al., 2004 call it) or a set of goal-directed predispositions to act (or not to act) in a certain way (as Dörnyei and Ottó, 1998, prefer to describe it) that is subject to change over time. That being so, the need is also felt to study L2 motivation longitudinally. At a macro level, for example, small declines in attitudes towards speakers of an L2 can happen out of historical shifts, as seems to have been the case in Hungary, where Dörnyei and Csizér (2005) found a small but noticeable motivational decline following the disillusionment with the promise of tourism and globalization that appears to have taken place in Hungary between 1993 and 1999, during a decade marked by changes towards the privatization of the economy after the end of the Communist rule in 1989. At a more local but still institutional level, it is not unusual to observe some decline in overall motivation for a given group of students from beginning to end of the curricular life of a semester or year of study, as Inbar et al. (2001) and Gardner et al. (2004) reported for very different contexts. Gardner et al. (2004) also report smaller sized changes in anxiety and teacher evaluation that emerged only towards the end of the semester, when ﬁnal exams were approaching. Looking at motivation at a more individual level and more qualitatively, Ushioda (2001) captured how the nature of the motivation experienced by 14 undergraduates learning French in Dublin changed over the course of about 15 months. They went from more intrinsic kinds of motivation related to academic interest and sheer enjoyment, in the beginning of study, to a heightened awareness of the pragmatic rewards and usefulness to be accrued, towards the end. Ushioda calls the former causal motivational thinking, perhaps evoking a retrospective view at the beginning of the course of study that was rooted in the ‘why’s’ of studying French based on past positive learning histories; the latter type Ushioda terms teleological motivational thinking, as it suggests a prospective view directed to future goals and returns. She speculates teleological motivational thought evolves only gradually over time but eventually may ‘assume motivational importance and clarity’ (p. 117) as learners progress in their instructional efforts.
Contemporary work on L2 motivation is also beginning to consider how motivated behaviour is a property that emerges out of the situated activity of a social unit of the classroom or group. That is, motivation is considered in its micro context with the aid of explanations from group dynamics and situated cognition. To illustrate, Dörnyei (2002) found that students with high integrativeness and positive course attitudes were more likely to hold positive attitudes towards doing a speciﬁc oral argumentative L2 task than peers scoring low on these dimensions. In turn, positive task attitudes (as well as positive course attitudes) resulted in more L2 output being produced while doing the task. Even more importantly, the oral participation of students who were low in attitude towards the task was improved and resulted in relatively more language being produced whenever such a low task- motivation student nevertheless held positive attitudes towards the course in general, or whenever a student with less positive attitudes towards the speciﬁc task was paired with a highly motivated peers. These ﬁndings, although from a single study, suggest the need to probe the relationship between motivation, tasks and the collective motivational state of peers.
Another recent change is the recognition that beyond L2 achievement we need to see what changes in behaviour motivation can cause. As Csizér and Dörnyei (2005a) bluntly put it, ‘motivation is a concept that explains why people behave as they do rather than how successful their behavior will be’ (p. 20). At a minimum, behavioural estimation points like self-projected language choice (‘if you could choose, which foreign languages would you choose to learn next year at school (or work)?’) and self-reported intended learning effort (‘how much effort are you prepared to expend in learning these languages?’) can be considered (see Appendix 1 in Dörnyei et al., 2006). Besides looking into motivation and L2 achievement, we now have to take into account (directly observed or at least self-reported) behaviour.

8.8	LOOKING FORWARD: THE L2 MOTIVATIONAL SELF SYSTEM	

Perhaps the most signiﬁcant change in how we may understand motivation in future years is the L2 Motivational Self System, formulated by Dörnyei (2005; Csizér and Dörnyei, 2005b). This proposal synthesizes previous models into one macro model of language-speciﬁc motivation, but building on the general social psychological theory of regulatory focus and the notion that humans make decisions as to how to act motivated by references to an ideal self.
The theory of regulatory focus was developed by affect and motivation psychologist from Columbia University E. Tory Higgins (2000, 2005). He posits that humans self-regulate their behaviour motivated by the need to balance a promotion focus, in which we are able to anticipate gain or pleasure from an action, and a prevention focus, in which we are able to anticipate pain or shame from the same action. According to Higgins, a promotion focus entails a reference to an ‘ideal self’ (the kind of person we would like to be) and the accomplishments and aspirations we have attached to it. It also relates to a more intrinsic kind of motivation and to asking ourselves the question: Is it worthwhile to do X? By contrast, a prevention focus entails a reference to an ‘ought-to self’ (the kind of person we think we should be) and the safety and responsibility values we have attached to it. It also relates to more extrinsic or only partially internalized motives and to posing ourselves the question: Is it worth it to do X?
In applying these ideas to L2 motivation, Dörnyei proposes the construct of the L2 Motivational Self System, which is made up of three main components:

1.	‘Ideal L2 Self’, referring to the L2-speciﬁc facet of one’s ‘ideal self’ – if the person we would like to become speaks an L2, the ideal L2 self is a powerful motivator to learn the particular language because we would like to reduce the discrepancy between our actual and ideal selves.

2.	‘Ought-to L2 Self’, referring to the attributes that we believe we ought to possess to avoid possible negative outcomes – this motivational dimension may therefore bear little resemblance to our own desires or wishes.

3 ‘L2 Learning Experience’, which concerns executive motives related to the immediate learning environment and experience [...].
(Dörnyei et al., 2006, p. 145)

He further proposes that integrativeness be redeﬁned not as a drive to identify with members of the target language (something that his work and that of others has shown to be of low relevance in many foreign language contexts), but as a drive to close the gap or discrepancy between the actual self and the ideal self, who in highly L2 motivated individuals happens to have been conceived as an L2-speaking self. That is, the highly motivated individual will score high in integrativeness while simultaneously being intrinsically as well as instrumentally motivated to learn the L2 because of a formed L2 speaking ideal self that she or he can anticipate as a reference point and that links L2 success with a promotion focus. Under this proposed reconceptualization, integrativeness is indeed the major and most immediate antecedent of L2 motivation across contexts, but only if relabelled as ideal L2 self (Csizér and Dörnyei, 2005a, 2005b), which is in turn directly affected by the antecedents of instrumentality and attitudes towards L2 speakers. Given these antecedents of motivation, at least four motivational proﬁles can then be distinguished in the L2 Motivational Self model. The model is schematically represented in Table 8.3.
The four proﬁles have been empirically supported in the ﬁndings reported by Csizér and Dörnyei (2005b; and Chapter 6 of Dörnyei et al., 2006). The most motivated individuals will develop high motivation (correlated to a self-reported strong intention to invest effort to learn the L2) and high levels of all motivational antecedents, including high instrumentality, positive attitudes towards the L2 speakers and culture, and general high interest in learning foreign languages. These motivated individuals exhibit this pattern because of a well-developed ideal L2 self. The highly motivated individual will be also instrumentally or more extrinsically motivated by anticipated pragmatic rewards and utility that we see in learning an L2. After all, ‘[i]n our idealized image of ourselves we want to appear personally agreeable (associated with positive attitudes towards the L2 community and culture) and also professionally successful (associated with instrumental motives)’ (Csizér and Dörnyei, 2005b, pp. 637–8).
Individuals with a lesser quality of motivation to learn an L2, however, will be of three kinds. Some have high instrumentality scores, but have less positive attitudes, cultural interest, and so on; that is, they exhibit less powerful motivation that is nourished by reference to the ought-to self rather than the ideal L2 self. They are still fuelled by motivation, but of an extrinsic kind. Other learners score high on attitudes but low on instrumentality, meaning that they do not see personal relevance or usefulness to being able to know or use the L2. These types of learner are typically even less motivated because, without a sense of instrumentality (by reference to the ought-to self) or integrativeness (by reference to the ideal L2 self), positive attitudes alone cannot sufﬁciently boost motivational intensity. Finally, the least motivated proﬁle comprises individuals who score low on motivation because they are not moved to exert effort to learn the L2 by either the ideal or the ought-to selves; they simply do not experience sufﬁcient levels of integrativeness, instrumentality, or positive attitudes to L2 speakers and hence are demotivated or amotivated.
The importance placed in the L2 Motivational Self model on the self-concept when explaining the nature of motivation in L2 learning opens the horizon to research on individual differences where cognitive, conative and affective dimensions can be blended and studied as interrelated. We will examine some of such additional inﬂuences in Chapter 9.

8.9	BEHOLD THE POWER OF MOTIVATION	

We end this chapter on motivation with what is perhaps the most important question that teachers and learners of languages ask themselves: How central is motivation in explaining the relative degree of success that different people encounter when they attempt to learn an additional language? That is, how much can motivation buy us in predicting successful L2 learning?
Based on a meta-analysis of studies produced by Gardner’s laboratory, Masgoret and Gardner (2003) concluded that scores on the three AMTB subscales of effort, enjoyment and investment combined consistently explain on average between nine per cent (r = 0.30) and 16 per cent (r = 0.40) of the variation shared between motivational quantity and L2 achievement, which in their line of work is always deﬁned as course grades, self-reported competence or proﬁciency test scores, depending on the studies. Although nine to 16 per cent may be thought of as a modest effect size, the ﬁnding is nevertheless impressive, because it is based on over 50 independent samples comprising a total of over 8,000 students and it pertains to only one component (motivational quantity) of a multi-construct model. By the same token, we must avoid overinterpreting this ﬁnding, as the relationship uncovered by Gardner and associates is a strictly quantitative one, measured via the narrow framework of the AMTB.
Considering more contemporary theories of motivation, Dörnyei (2007) reports unpublished results that suggest the association is much higher, in the range between r = 0.38 and 0.78, with an average of r = 0.59, which amounts to 35 per cent explained variance. This other evidence draws on contextualized and personality-related views of L2 learning of the new family of motivation theories reviewed in sections 8.7 and 8.8. It comprises scores extracted from more theory- relevant criterion measures than holistic reactions to AMTB statements. For example, more contemporary motivation surveys, such as the one developed by Dörnyei et al. (2006), may include statements and questions about reported intended effort (‘how much effort are you prepared to expend in learning X language?’ 5 = very much, 1 = not at all) and reported behaviours (‘I often watch satellite programmes on TV’ 5 = absolutely true, 1 = not true at all). Other researchers have begun to actually measure behaviours, such as amount of participation in L2 activities (Dörnyei, 2002; Dörnyei and Kormos, 2000).
A caution worth keeping in mind, however, is that the association between motivation and behaviour changes as well as L2 learning success has always been viewed as reciprocal, not causal: being motivated nurtures more successful L2 learning, but, conversely, experiencing L2 learning success also boosts motivation to even higher levels, in a reinforcing cycle. Thus, motivation is indeed central in explaining L2 learning, but it cannot be reduced to a few variables, nor can it be exhausted with just a few questionnaires and group data. The challenge that has opened up with the innovations since the late 1990s, and particularly since the turn of the new century, resides in implementing studies that do justice to the complexity and dynamicity of motivation to learn additional languages. Such future studies will have to take into consideration the ebbs and ﬂows of time, the ﬂuctuations that come with changing contexts and the many reciprocal inﬂuences that fuel and sustain behaviours and desires needed to learn an additional language.
